
1. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the creator Ahura
Mazda, the radiant and glorious, the greatest and the best, the
most beautiful (?) (to our conceptions), the most firm, the wisest,
and the one of all whose body is the most perfect, who attains
His ends the most infallibly, because of his Asha, to him who
disposes our minds aright, who sends His joy-creating grace afar;
who made us, and has fashioned us, and who has nourished and protected
us, who is the most bounteous Spirit!

2. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) to Vohu Mano, and
to the Highest Asha, and to Khshathra Vairya, and to Spenta Armaiti,
and to the two, the Haurvatat and Ameretat, to the body of the
Kine, and to the Kine's Soul, and to the Fire of Ahura Mazda,
that one who more than (all) the Amesha Spentas has made most
effort (for our succor)!

3. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for Asnya, the masters
of Asha, to Hawan, Asha-sanctified, master of Asha; and I celebrate,
and I carry out (this Yasna) for Savanghi and for Visya, Asha-sanctified,
master(s) of Asha.

I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for Mithra of wide pastures,
of the thousand ears, and of the myriad eyes, the Yazad of the
spoken name, and for Raman Khwastra.

4. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for Rapithwin, the
Asha-sanctified master of Asha, and for Fradat-fshu, and for Zangtuma,
the holy master(s) of Asha; and I celebrate and carry out (this
Yasna) to Asha the Best, and to the Fire of Ahura Mazda.

5. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for Uzerin the Asha-sanctified
master of Asha, and for Fradat-vira and Dakhyuma, the Asha-sanctified
master(s) of Asha, and for that lofty Ahura Napat-apam (the son
of waters), and for the waters which Ahura Mazda made.

6. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for Aiwisruthrem (and)
Aibigaya,
the Asha-sanctified master(s) of Asha, and for the Zarathushtrotema,
and for him who possesses and who gives that prosperity in life
which furthers all. And I celebrate and carry out (this Yasna)
for the fravashis of the saints, and for those of the women who
have many sons,
and for a prosperous
home life which continues without reverse throughout the year,
and for that Might which is well-shaped and stately,

which strikes victoriously, Ahura-made, and for that Victorious
Ascendency (which it secures).

1. Or, "who furthers life."

2. "Men and herds?"

3. "Well-grown."

7. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for Ushahin, the Asha-sanctified
master of Asha, and for Berejya (and) Nmanya, the Asha-sanctified
master(s) of Asha, and for Sraosha, companion of Ashi, possessing
rewards, victorious, who furthers the world, and the very straight
Rashnu and Arshtad, who further the world, who augment the world.

8. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the Mahya, the
monthly festivals, masters of Asha, for the new and the later

moon, the Asha-sanctified
master of Asha, and for the full moon which scatters night.

4. Literally, "the moon within," showing little light.

9. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the Yairya, yearly
feasts, the Asha-sanctified masters of Asha. I celebrate and carry
out (this Yasna) for Maidyozarem, the Asha-sanctified master of
Asha, and for Maidyoshahem, the Asha-sanctified master of Asha,
and for Paitishahem, and for Ayathrem the advancer, and the spender
of the strength of males, the Asha-sanctified master of Asha,
and for Maidyarem, the Asha-sanctified master of Asha, and for
Hamaspathmaidyem, the Asha-sanctified master of Asha; yea, I celebrate
and carry out this Yasna for the seasons, masters of Asha.

10. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for all those who
are the thirty three masters of Asha, which, coming the nearest,
are around about Hawan, and which (as in their festivals) were
instituted by Ahura Mazda, and were promulgated by Zarathushtra,
as the masters of Asha Vahishta.

11. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the two, for Ahura
and Mithra, the lofty, and the everlasting, and the Asha-sanctified,
and for all the stars which are Spenta Mainyu's creatures, and
for the star Tishtrya, the resplendent and glorious, and for the
Moon which contains the seed of the Kine, and for the resplendent
Sun, the swift-horsed, the eye of Ahura Mazda, and for Mithra
the province ruler. And I celebrate and carry out this Yasna for
Ahura Mazda (once again, and as to him who rules the month), the
radiant, the glorious, and for the Fravashis of the saints.

12. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for you, o Fire, son
of Ahura Mazda, together with all the fires, and for the good
waters, even for all the waters made by Mazda, and for all the
plants which Mazda made.

13. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the Bounteous
Manthra, the Asha-sanctified and effective, the revelation given
against the Daevas; the Zoroastrian revelation, and for the long
descent
of the good Mazdayasnian Faith.

1. 'The long tradition;' so Spiegel.

14. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the mountain Ushi-darena,
the Mazda-made, with its sacred brilliance, and for all the mountains
glorious with sanctity,
with their
abundant Glory Mazda-made, and for that majestic Glory Mazda-made,
the unconsumed
Glory which Mazda made. And I announce and carry out (this Yasna)
for Ashi the good, the blessedness (of the reward), and for Chisti,
the good religious Knowledge, for the good Erethe (Rectitude
?),
and for the good Rasastat (persisting zeal?
), and to the Glory
and the Benefit which are Mazda-made.

1. Observe the impossibility of the meaning 'comfort,' or mere 'well-being' here.

2. Or possibly 'the unseized,' the Pahlavi agrift(?);
Ner. agrihitam; hvar, to eat, may have meant 'seize' originally.

3. Erethe (riti?) seems without inflection.

4. The state of activity (?).

15. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the pious and
good Blessing of the religious man, the Asha-sanctified, and for
the curse of wisdom, the swift and redoubted Yazad of potency
(to blight).

16. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for these places and
these lands, and for these pastures, and these abodes with their
springs of water(?)
, and for the waters, land, and plants, and for
this earth and for yon heaven, and for the Asha-sanctified wind,
and for the stars, moon, and sun, and for the eternal stars without
beginning, and self-disposing, and for all the Asha-sanctified
creatures of Spenta Mainyu, male and female, the regulators of
Asha.

2. The Pahlavi with its afkhvar points here perhaps to a better
text. Recall awzhdatemja, awzhdaungho, awrem.

17. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for that lofty lord
who is the Asha (itself), and for the masters of the days in their
duration, and of the days during daylight, for the moons, the
years, and the seasons which are masters of Asha at the time of
Hawan.

18. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for the fravashis
of the saints, the redoubted, which overwhelm (the evil), for
those of the saints of the ancient lore, for those of the next
of kin, and for the fravashi of (my) own soul!

19. I announce (and) carry out (this Yasna) for all the masters
of Asha, and for all the yazads, the beneficent, who dispose (of
all) aright, for those both heavenly and earthly, who are (meet)
for our sacrifice and homage because of Asha Vahishta
.

3. Hum2 118 (Yazata%ibyO ... YOi he#ti YasnyAja VahmyAja
aCAT haja YaT VahictAT): "the Yazatas who are worthy of worship
and worthy of glorification in accordance with best truth"

20. O Hawan, Asha-sanctified master of Asha, and Savanghi, Rapithwin,
and Uzerin, and Aiwisruthrem, (and) Aibigaya, (you who aids life!)
if I have offended you, and you, o Ushahin, Asha-sanctified master
of Asha!

21. If I have offended you, whether by thought, or word, or deed,
whether by act of will, or without intent or wish, I earnestly
make up the deficiency of this in praise to you. If I have caused
decrease in that which is your Yasna, and your homage, I announce
(and carry out) to you (the more for this)!

22. Yea, all ye masters, the greatest ones, Asha-sanctified masters
of Asha, if I have offended you by thought, or word, or deed,
whether with my will, or without intending error, I praise you
(now the more) for this. I announce to you (the more) if I have
caused decrease in this which is your Yasna, and your praise.

23. I would confess myself a Mazda-worshipper, of Zarathushtra's
order, a foe to the Daevas, devoted to the lore of Ahura, for
Hawan, the Asha-sanctified master of Asha, for (his) sacrifice,
homage, propitiation, and praise, for Savanghi and for Visya,
the Asha-sanctified master of Asha, for (his) sacrifice, homage,
propitiation and praise, and for the sacrifice, homage, propitiation
and praise of the masters of the days in their duration, and of
the days during daylight, for those of the monthly festivals,
and for those of the yearly ones, and for those of the seasons!

2.

(Adapted from Mills.)

1. I desire the libations [Zaothras] for this Yasna; I desire
the Baresman for this Yasna. I desire the Baresman for this Yasna;
I desire the libations for this Yasna. I desire the libations
together with Baresman for this Yasna; I desire the Baresman together
with the libations for this Yasna. With this libation I desire
this Baresman for this Yasna. With this Baresman I desire this
libation for this Yasna. This Baresman with the libation I desire
for this Yasna. I desire for this Yasna this Baresman with this
libation and with its kusti, and spread with Asha.

2. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Ashawan Ahura Mazdah, the master of Asha. I desire for this Yasna
the well-ruling, judicious Amesha Spentas.

3. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Asnya, the master of Asha. I desire for this Yasna
the Asha-sanctified Hawan, the master of Asha. I desire for this
Yasna the Savanghi and the Asha-sanctified Visya, the master of
Asha. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna
Mithra of the wide pastures, of the thousand ears, of the ten-thousand
eyes, the Yazad of the spoken name. I desire for this Yasna Raman
Khwastra.

4. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Rapithwin, the master of Asha. I desire for this
Yasna the Fradat-fshav and the Asha-sanctified Zantuma, the master
of Asha. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna
Asha Vahishta and Atar, the Son of Ahura Mazda.

5. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Uzerin, the master of Asha. I desire for this
Yasna the Fradat-vira and the Asha-sanctified Dahyuma, the master
of Asha. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna
the high Lord, the kingly and brilliant Apam-Napat, of swift-horses,
and likewise the water, Mazda-made and holy.

6. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Aiwisruthrem Aibigaya the master of Asha. I desire
for this Yasna the Fradat-vispam-hujyatay and the Asha-sanctified
Zarathushtro-tema, the master of Asha.

With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the good,
mighty, bountiful Fravashis of the Asha-sanctified.

I desire for this Yasna the women who have many sons. And I desire
for this Yasna the Yairya Hushitay; and I desire for this Yasna
the well-formed, stately Ama; and I desire for this Yasna the
Ahura-given Verethraghna; and I desire for this Yasna the triumphing
Uparatat.

7. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Ushahina, the master of Asha. I desire for this
Yasna the Berejya and the Asha-sanctified Nmanya, the master of
Asha.

With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna Sraosha,
companion of Ashi, fair of form, victorious, furthering the world,
Asha-sanctified, the master of Asha.

I desire for this Yasna the straightest Rashnu, and I desire for
this Yasna Arshtat, who furthers the settlements, and causes them
to increase.

8. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Mahya (Monthly festivals), the master of Asha.
I desire for this Yasna the Asha-sanctified Antaremah, the master
of Asha.

I desire for this Yasna the Pereno-mah and the Asha-sanctified
Vishaptatha, the master of Asha.

9. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
Asha-sanctified Yairya (Yearly festivals), the master of Asha.

I desire for this Yasna the Asha-sanctified Maidyozarem, the master
of Asha. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna
the Asha-sanctified Maidyoshahem, the master of Asha. With this
libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the Asha-sanctified
Paitishahem, the master of Asha.

With this libation and Barasman I desire for this Yasna Ayathrem,
the promoter, who spends the strength of males, Asha-sanctified,
the master of Asha.

With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the Asha-sanctified
Maidyarem, the master of Asha. With this libation and Baresman
I desire for this Yasna the Asha-sanctified Hamaspathmaidyem,
the master of Asha. With this libation and Baresman I desire for
this Yasna the Asha-sanctified Yairya (Yearly festivals), the
masters of Asha.

10. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna all
of the masters of Asha, the thirty-three who come the nearest
round about our Hawans, who are masters of Asha Vahishta, which
were inculcated by Mazda, and spoken forth by Zarathushtra.

11. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna Ahura
(and) Mithra, the lofty, eternal, and Asha-sanctified two.

I desire for this Yasna the Stars and Moon and Sun (and) - with
the Baresman-Plants - and Mithra, the governor of all the provinces.
With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the radiant
and glorious Ahura Mazda. With this libation and Baresman I desire
for this Yasna the good, heroic, bountiful Fravashis of the Asha-sanctified.

12. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna you,
the Asha-sanctified Atar, the Son of Ahura Mazda, the master of
Asha, with all Fires. With this libation and Baresman I desire
for this Yasna the good, best, Mazda-made, Asha-sanctified Water.
I desire for this Yasna all the Mazda-made Asha-sanctified Waters.
I desire for this Yasna all the Mazda-made, Asha-sanctified Plants.

13. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
bounteous Manthra, the most glorious. I desire for this Yasna
the law instituted against the Daevas. I desire for this Yasna
the Zoroastrian law. I desire for this Yasna the long tradition.
I desire for this Yasna the good Mazdayasnian Religion.

14. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna Mount
Ushi-darena, Mazda-made, the Yazad possessing the ease of Asha.
I desire for this Yasna all mountains possessed of ease of Asha,
full of ease
, Mazda-made, Asha-sanctified, the masters of Asha.

I desire for this Yasna the strong, Mazda-made khwarrah of the
Kavis. I desire for this Yasna the strong, Mazda-made ungraspable
khwarrah.

With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the good
Ashi, the brilliant, tall, vigorous, fair of form, self-sufficient.

I desire for this Yasna the Mazda-made khwarrah; I desire for
this Yasna the Mazda-made prosperity.

2. Bailey 18 (VIsp@ garayO aCa-qA+r@ pouru-qA+r@): "All the
mountains possessed of easeful life, abounding therein."

15. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna the
pious and good Blessing. I desire for this Yasna the pious, Asha-sanctified
Man, and I desire for this Yasna the strong, brave Yazad Damoish
Upamana.

16. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna these
Waters and Lands and Plants; I desire for this Yasna these places,
districts, and pastures, and these dwellings with their springs
of water, and this land-ruler, who is Ahura Mazda.

17. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna all
the greatest masters: the day-lords, the month-lords, those of
the years, and of the seasons, and the good, mighty, beneficent
Fravashis of the Asha-sanctified.

18. With this libation and Baresman I desire for this Yasna all
the Asha-sanctified Yazatas. I desire for this Yasna all the masters
of Asha: Hawan at his time, and Savanghi and Visya at their times,
and all the greatest masters at their times.

3.

THE YASNA ADVANCES TO THE NAMING OF THE OBJECTS OF PROPITIATION.

1. With a Baresman brought to its appointed place accompanied
with the Zaothra at the time of Hawan, I desire to approach the
Myazda-offering with my praise, as it is consumed, and likewise
Ameretat (as the guardian of plants and wood) and Haurvatat (who
guards the water), with the (fresh) meat
, for the propitiation
of Ahura Mazda, and of the Bountiful Immortals, and for the propitiation
of Sraosha (who is Obedience) the blessed, who is endowed with
sanctity, and who smites with the blow of victory, and causes
the settlements to advance.

1. Hum 93: "with reverence I fetch integrity and immortality,
and (the flesh of) the munificent cow, (to serve as) repast (and)
sacrificial food"

2. And I desire to approach Haoma and Para-haoma with my praise
for the propitiation of the Fravashi of Spitama Zarathushtra,
the saint. And I desire to approach the (sacred) wood with my
praise, with the perfume, for the propitiation of thee, the Fire,
O Ahura Mazda's son!

3. And I desire to approach the Haomas with my praise for the
propitiation of the good waters which Mazda created; and I desire
to approach the Haoma-water, and the fresh milk with my praise,
and the plant Hadhanaepata, offered with sanctity for the propitiation
of the waters which are Mazda-made.

4. And I desire to approach this Baresman with the Zaothra with
my praise, with its binding and spread with sanctity for the propitiation
of the Bountiful Immortals. And I desire with (?) my voice the
thoughts well thought, and the words well spoken, and the deeds
well done, and the recital of the Gathas as they are heard. And
I desire to approach the well-said Mathras with my praise, and
this (higher) lordship with this sanctity, and this exact regulation
(of the Ratu), and the reverential prayer for blessings (spoken
at the fitting hour); and I desire to approach them for the contentment
and propitiation of the holy Yazads, heavenly and earthly, and
for the contentment of each man's soul.

5.
And I desire to approach the Asnya with my praise, the lords
of the ritual order, and the Havani and Savanghi and Visya, the
holy lords of the ritual order. And I desire to approach with
the Yasht of Mithra of the wide pastures, of the thousand ears,
of the myriad eyes, the Yazad of the spoken name, and with him
Raman Hvastra.

2. y3.5-19 = y22.5-19.

6. And I desire to approach Rapithwina with my praise, the holy
lord of the ritual order, and Fradat-fshu and Zantuma, and Righteousness
the Best, and Ahura Mazda's Fire.

7. And I desire to approach Uzayeirina, and Fradat-vira and Dahvyuma*
with my praise, with that lofty Ahura Napt-apam, and the waters
Mazda-made,

8. And Aiwisruthrima, and Aibigaya, and Fradat-vispam-hujaiti,
and Zarathushtrotema with the Yasht of the Fravashis of the saints,
and of the women who have many sons, and the year long unchanged
prosperity, and of Might, the well-shaped and stately, smiting
victoriously, Ahura-made and of the Victorious Ascendency (which
it secures).

9. And I desire to approach Ushahina, Berejya, and Nmanya with
the Yasht of Sraosha (Obedience) the sacred, the holy, who smites
with the blow of victory, and makes the settlements advance, and
with that of Rashnu, the most just, and Arshtat who furthers the
settlements, and causes them to increase.

10. And I desire to approach the monthly festivals, the lords
of the ritual order, and the new moon and the waning moon, and
the full moon which scatters night,

11. And the yearly festivals, Maidhyo-zaremaya, Maidhyo-shema,
Paitishahya, and Ayathrima the breeder who spends the strength
of males, and Maidhyairya, and Hamaspathmaedhaya, and the seasons,
lords of the ritual order, (12) and all those lords who are the
three and thirty, who approach the nearest at the time of Havani,
who are the Lords of Asha called Vahishta (and whose services
were) inculcated by Mazda, and pronounced by Zarathushtra, as
the feasts of Righteousness, the Best.

13. And I desire to approach Ahura and Mithra, the lofty and imperishable
two, the holy, and with the Yasht of those stars which are the
creatures of Spenta Mainyu, and with the Yasht of the star Tistrya,
the radiant, the glorious, and with that of the moon which contains
the seed of cattle, and with that of the resplendent sun, the
eye of Ahura Mazda, and of Mithra, province-lord of the provinces,
and with that of Ahura Mazda (as He rules this day) the radiant,
the glorious, and with that of the Fravashis of the saints, (who
rule this month),

14. And with thy Yasht, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! with
all the fires, and to the good waters with the Yasht of all the
waters which are Mazda-made, and with that of all the plants which
Mazda made.

15. And I desire to approach with the Yasht of the Mathra Spenta,
the holy, the effective, the law composed against the Daevas,
the Zarathushtrian, and with that of the long descent of the Religion
which Mazda gave.

16. And I desire to approach with the Yasht of Mount Ushi-darena,
Mazda-made, and of all, glorious with sanctity, and abundant in
brilliance, and with that of the Kingly Glory, Mazda-made; yea,
with that of the unconsumed glory which Mazda made, and with that
of Ashi Vanguhi, and Chishti Vanguhi, and with that of the good
Erethe, and the good Rasastat, and the good Glory, and of the
Benefit which Mazda gave.

17. And I desire to approach with the Yasht of the good and pious
Blessing of the pious man and of the saint, and with that of the
awful and swift Curse of the wise, the Yazad-curse, (18) and to
these places, regions, pastures, and abodes, with their water-springs,
and with that of the waters, and the lands, and the plants, and
with that of this earth and yon heaven, and with that of the holy
wind and of the stars, moon, and sun, and with that of the stars
without beginning, self-determined and self-moved, and with that
of all the holy creatures which are those of Spenta Mainyu, male
and female, regulators of the ritual order, (19) and with that
of the lofty lord who is Righteousness (himself, the essence of
the ritual), and with that of the days in their duration, and
of the days during daylight, and with that of the monthly festivals,
and the yearly festivals, and with those of the several seasons
which are lords of the ritual at the time of Havani.

20. And I desire to approach the meat-offering with a Yasht, and
Haurvatat (who guards the water), and Ameretatat (who guards the
plants and wood), with the Yasht of the sacred flesh for the propitiation
of Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the mighty, whose body
is the Mathra, of him of the daring spear, the lordly, the Yazad
of the spoken name.

21. And I desire to approach both Haoma and the Haoma-juice with
a Yasht for the propitiation of the Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama,
the saint, the Yazad of the spoken name. And I desire to approach
the wood-billets with a Yasht, with the perfume for the propitiation
of thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son! the Yazad of the spoken
name.

22. And I desire to approach with a Yasht for the mighty Fravashis
of the saints, the overwhelming, the Fravashis of those who held
to the ancient lore, and of those of the next of kin.

23. And I desire to approach toward all the lords of the ritual
order with a Yasht, toward all the good Yazads, heavenly and earthly,
who are (set) for worship and for praise because of Asha Vahishta
(of Righteousness the Best).

24. I will confess myself a Mazdayasnian, of Zarathushtra's order,
a foe to the Daevas, devoted to the lore of the Lord for Havani,
the holy lord of the ritual order, for sacrifice, homage, propitiation,
and for praise, and for Savanghi and Visya, the holy lord(s) of
the ritual order, and for the sacrifice, homage, propitiation,
and praise of the day-lords of the days in their duration, and
of the days during daylight, and for the month-regulators, and
the year-regulators, and for those of the (several) seasons, for
their sacrifice, and homage, their propitiation, and their praise.

(The Zaotar speaks): As the Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, let
the priest speak forth to me.

(The Ratu responds): As the Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, let
him who is the Zaotar speak forth to me.

(The Zaotar again): So let the Ratu from his Righteousness, holy
and learned, speak forth!

4.

THE OFFERING TAKES PLACE.

1. These good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, these Haomas,
meat-offerings, and Zaothras, this Baresman spread with sanctity,
this flesh, and the two, Haurvatat (who guards the water) and
Ameretatat (who guards the plants and wood), even the flesh, the
Haoma and Haoma-juice, the wood-billets, and their perfume, this
sacred lordship and chieftainship, and the timely prayer with
blessing, and the heard recital of the Gathas, and the well-said
Mathras, these all we offer, and make known with celebrations
(here)
.

1. Hum2 131 (ima humatAja hUxtAja hvarctAja ... pairi
dademahI Aja Va%DayamahI): "these (our) well-thought
(thoughts) etc. we offer and dedicate;"

2. Yea, these do we announce with celebrations, and we present
them to Ahura Mazda
, and to Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, and
to the Bountiful Immortals, and to the Fravashis of the saints,
and to their souls, and to the Fire of Ahura Mazda, the lofty
lord of the entire creation of the holy, for sacrifice, homage,
propitiation, and praise.

2. Hum2 131 (AaT dIc Ava%DayamahI ahurAija mazdAi):
"thus, we dedicate them to Ahura Mazda"

3. Yea, further, we present (them to the Bountiful Immortals
with an especial gift) these thoughts well thought, these words
well spoken, these deeds well done, these Haomas, Myazdas, Zaothras,
and this Baresman spread with sanctity, the flesh, and Haurvatat
(who guards the water), and Ameretatat (who guards the plants
and wood), even the flesh, Haoma and Parahaoma, the wood-billets,
the perfume, and this their lordship and their sanctity, and this
chieftainship, this prayer for blessing, the heard recital of
the Gathas, and the well-said Mathras.

4. We offer with our celebrations, and we announce them (of a
verity) to the Bountiful Immortals, those who exercise their rule
aright, and who dispose (of all) aright, the ever-living, ever-helpful,
the male divinities among their number who dwell with the Good
Mind, [and the female ones as well].

5. And we announce them in our celebrations as more propitious
for this house, and for the furtherance of this house, of its
herds, and of its men
, of those now born, and of those yet to
be born, the holy, yea, for the furtherance of that house of which
these (men) are thus.

3. Hum2 172 (frada+Ai ... pasv&mja nar&mja):
"to promote cattle and men"

6. And we present these offerings to the good Fravashis of the
saints who are mighty and overwhelming for the succor of the saints.

7. Yea, we present these hereby to the Creator Ahura Mazda, the
radiant, the glorious, and the heavenly spirit, for the sacrifice,
homage, propitiation, and praise of the Bountiful Immortals (all).

8. And we present these hereby to the Day-lords of the ritual
order, to Havani, to Savanghi, and to Visya, the holy lords of
the ritual order, for sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and for
praise, and to Mithra of the wide pastures, and the thousand ears,
and the myriad eyes, the Yazad of the spoken name,

9. And to Rapithwina, Fradat-fshu, and Zantuma, the holy lords
of the ritual order, and to Righteousness the Best, and to Ahura
Mazda's Fire,

10. And to Uzayeirina, Fradat-vira, and Dahvyuma, the holy lords
of the ritual order, and to that lofty lord Napat-apam, and to
the water Mazda-made,

11. And to Aiwisruthrima, the life-furtherer, and to Fradat-vispam-hujyaiti
and Zarathushtrotema, the holy lords of the ritual order, and
to the Fravashis of the saints, and to the women who bring forth
many sons, and to the Prosperous home-life which endures without
reverse throughout the year, and to Force, well-shaped and stately,
and to the Blow of victory which Mazda gives, and to the Victorious
Ascendency which it secures, for their sacrifice, homage, their
propitiation, and their praise,

12. And to Ushahina, with Berejya and Nmanya, and Sraosha (Obedience)
the blessed, smiting with the blow of victory and furthering the
settlements, and to Rashnu, the most just, and to Arstat, furthering
the settlements, and causing them to increase.

13. And these we announce and we present hereby to the Month-lords
of the ritual order, to the new moon and the waning moon (the
moon within), and to the full moon which scatters night, the holy
lord of the ritual order, for (their) sacrifice, homage, their
propitiation, and their praise.

14. And these we announce hereby and we present to the Yearly
festivals, to Maidhyo-zaremaya, Maidhyo-shema, Patishahya, and
to Ayathrima, to Maidhyairya, Hamaspathmaedhaya, and to the Seasons
as holy lords of the ritual order, for sacrifice, homage, propitiation,
and for praise.

15. And these we announce and we present hereby to all those lords
who are the three and thirty lords of the ritual order, who approach
the nearest around about our Havani, and which are the festivals
of Righteousness the Best, inculcated by Mazda, and uttered forth
by Zarathushtra for their sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and
praise.

16. And these we announce and we present to Ahura and to Mithra,
the lofty, and imperishable, and holy two, to the stars, the creatures
of Spenta Mainyu, and to the star Tistrya, the radiant, the glorious,
and to the Moon which contains the seed of cattle, and to the
resplendent Sun, of the swift horses, Ahura Mazda's eye, and to
Mithra, the lord of provinces, for their sacrifice, homage, their
propitiation and their praise; yea, these we present hereby to
Ahura Mazda (as he rules this day) and to the Fravashis of the
saints (as they rule this month), for their sacrifice, homage,
their propitiation and their praise.

17. And these we announce hereby to thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's
son! with all the fires for thy sacrifice, homage, propitiation,
and praise, and to the good waters for the sacrifice, homage,
propitiation, and praise of all the waters Mazda-made, and to
all the plants which Mazda made,

18. And to the Mathra Spenta, the holy, the effective, the law
against the Daevas, the Zarathushtrian statute, and to the long
descent of the good Mazdayasnian religion.

19. And these we announce and we present hereby to Mount Ushi-darena,
Mazda-made, brilliant with sanctity, and to all the mountains
shining with their holiness, abundantly luminous, and Mazda-made,
and to the Kingly glory, the unconsumed glory Mazda-made, and
to the good Blessedness, and the good Religious-knowledge, and
the good Rectitude, and to the good Rasastat, and to the Glory
and the Benefit which Mazda created.

20. And these we offer and present to the pious and good Blessing
of the pious, and to the swift and dreadful Yazad, the Curse of
wisdom.

21. And to these places, pastures, and dwellings with their springs
of water, their rivers, to the lands and to the plants, to this
earth and yon heaven, to the holy wind, to the stars, moon, and
sun, to the stars without beginning, self-disposed, and to all
the holy creatures of the Spenta Mainyu, male and female (the
rulers as they are of the ritual order).

22. And these we announce and we present hereby to that lofty
lord who is Asha, the ritual righteousness itself, to the Day-lords,
and the Month-lords, the Year-lords, and the Seasons who are the
lords of the ritual at the time of Havani, and for their sacrifice,
homage, their propitiation and their praise.

23. Yea, these we announce and we present to Sraosha, the blessed
and mighty, whose body is the Mathra, him of the daring spear,
the lordly one, and to the holy Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama,
the saint.

And these we announce and we present to thee, the Fire, O Ahura
Mazda's son! for thy sacrifice, homage, thy propitiation, and
thy praise.

24. And these we announce and we present to the Fravashis of the
saints, the mighty and overwhelming, of the saints of the ancient
lore, and of the next of kin.

25. And these we announce and we present hereby to all the good
Yazads, earthly and heavenly, who are (meet) for sacrifice, homage,
propitiation, and for praise, because of Asha Vahishta (who is
Righteousness the Best).

We worship the Bountiful Immortals who rule aright, and who dispose
of all aright.

26. And that one of beings (do we worship) whose superior (service)
in the sacrifice Ahura Mazda knows, and from his righteousness
(which he maintains, and those of all female beings do we worship)
whose (higher service is thus likewise known; yea, all) male and
female beings do we worship (who are such)!

4. This prayer is known as the
Yenghe Hatam
.
It is one of the three holiest prayers, and is in the Old Avesta
dialect (aka 'Gathic'). Boyce (
Textual Sources
, p. 57) translates
it thus: Those Beings, male and female, whom Lord Mazda knows the
best for worship according to truth, we worship them all.

5.

(This chapter is identical with Yasna 37. )

6.

THE SACRIFICE CONTINUES WITH FULLER EXPRESSION

1. We worship the Creator Ahura Mazda with our sacrifice, and
the Bountiful Immortals who rule aright, and who dispose of all
aright.

2. And we worship the Asnya with our sacrifice, and Havani, Savanghi
and Visya, the holy lords of the ritual order, and Mithra of the
wide pastures, of the thousand ears, and myriad eyes, the Yazad
of the spoken name, and we worship Raman Hvastra.

3. And we worship Rapithwina with our sacrifice, and Fradat-fshu,
and the Zantuma, and Righteousness the Best, and the Fire, Ahura
Mazda's son, holy lords of the ritual order.

4. And we worship Uzayeirina, and Fradat-vira, and Dahvyuma*,
the holy lord of the ritual order, and that kingly Ahura, the
radiant Napat-apam, of the fleet horses, and the water holy, and
Mazda-made.

5. And we worship Aiwisruthrima and Aibigaya in our sacrifice,
the holy lord of the ritual order, and Fradat-vispam-hujyaiti
and the Zarathushtrotema, the holy lord of the ritual order, and
the good, heroic, bountiful Fravashis of the saints, and the women
who bring forth many sons, and the Prosperous home-life which
endures without reverse throughout the year, and Force which is
well-shaped and stately, and the Blow which brings the victory,
which is Ahura-given, and the Victorious Ascendency (which it
secures).

6. And we worship Ushahina with our sacrifice, and Berejya, and
Nmanya, and Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the stately who
smites with victory, and makes the settlements advance, and Rashnu,
the most just, and Arshtat who makes the settlements advance and
causes them to increase, the holy lords of the ritual order.

7. And we worship the Mahya in our sacrifice, the new moon and
the waning moon (the moon within) and the full moon which scatters
night, the holy lord of the ritual order.

8. And we worship the Yearly festivals in our sacrifice, Maidhya-zaremaya,
Maidhyo-shema, Paitishhahya, and Ayathrima, the furtherer (or
breeder), the spender of virile strength, and Maidhyairya, the
holy lord of the ritual order, and Hamaspathmaedhaya, and the
Seasons (in which they are).

9. And we worship with our sacrifice all the lords of the ritual
order, who are the thirty and three who approach the nearest around
about us at Havani, who are the lords of Righteousness the Best,
and whose observances were inculcated by Ahura Mazda, and uttered
forth by Zarathushtra.

10. And we worship Ahura and Mithra with our sacrifice, the lofty,
and imperishable, and holy two, and the stars, moon, and sun,
among the plants of the Baresman, and Mithra, the province-lord
of all the provinces, even Ahura Mazda, the radiant, the glorious,
and the good, valiant, and bountiful Fravashis of the saints.

11. And we worship thee, the Fire, Ahura Mazda's son, together
with all the fires, and the good waters, the best and Mazda-made,
and holy, even all the waters which are Mazda-made and holy, and
all the plants which Mazda made.

12. And we worship the Mathra Spenta with our sacrifice, the glorious
and of a truth, the law revealed against the Daevas, the Zarathushtrian
law, and we worship with our sacrifice its long descent, and the
good Mazdayasnian Religion.

13. And we worship Mount Ushi-darena, the Mazda-made, the glorious
Yazad, shining with holiness, and all the mountains that shine
with holiness, with abundant brilliance, Mazda-made, the holy
lords of the ritual order. And we worship the mighty Kingly glory
Mazda-made, the mighty glory, unconsumed and Mazda-made, and the
good Sanctity, the brilliant, the lofty, the powerful and the
stately, delivering (men) with its inherent power. Yea, we worship
the Glory, and the Benefit which are Mazda-made.

14. And we worship the pious and good Blessing with our sacrifice,
and the pious man, the saint, and that Yazad, the mighty Curse
of wisdom.

15. And we worship these waters, lands, and plants, these places,
districts, pastures, and abodes with their springs of water, and
we worship this lord of the district with our sacrifice, who is
Ahura Mazda (Himself).

16. And we worship all the greatest lords, the Day-lords in the
day's duration, and the Day-lords during daylight, and the Month-lords,
and the Year-lords.

17. And we worship Haurvatat (who guards the water) and Ameretatat
(who guards the plants and the wood), and Sraosha (Obedience)
the blessed and the stately, who smites with the blow of victory,
and makes the settlements advance, the holy lord of the ritual
order.

18. And we worship Haoma with our sacrifice and the Haoma-juice.
And we worship the sacred Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama the
saint.

And we worship the wood-billets, and the perfume and thee, the
Fire, Ahura Mazda's son, the holy lord of the ritual order.

19. And we worship the good, heroic, bountiful Fravashis of the
saints.

20. And we worship all the holy Yazads, and all the lords of the
ritual order at the time of Havani, and Savanghi, and all the
greatest lords at their (proper) time. (The Yenhe hatam follows.)

21. The Ratu. As an Ahu (revered and) to be chosen, the priest
speaks forth to me. The Zaotar. So let the Ratu from his Righteousness,
holy and learned, speak forth!

7.

PRESENTATION OF OFFERINGS BY THE PRIEST WITH THE OBJECT OF PROPITIATION
NAMED.

1. With a complete and sacred offering [Ashi] I offer and I give
this meat-offering, and (with it) Haurvatat (who guards the water),
and Ameretatat (who guards the plants and the wood), and the flesh
of the Kine of blessed gift
, for the propitiation of Ahura Mazda,
and of the Bountiful Immortals (all, and) for the propitiation
of Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, endowed with sanctity, who
smites with the blow of victory, and who causes the settlements
to advance.

1. Hum 93: "truthfully I offer integrity and immortality and
(the flesh of) the munificent cow";
Hum2 98 (daD&mi qare+em myazdem haurvata ameretAta gAuc hud@):
"as sacrificial repast and food I offer integrity [water],
immortality [plants], and the munificent cow [flesh]"

2. And I offer the Haoma and Haoma-juice with a complete and
sacred offering for the propitiation of the Fravashi of Zarathushtra
Spitama the saint, and I offer the wood-billets with the perfume
for Thy propitiation, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son!

3. And I offer the Haomas with a complete and sacred offering
for propitiation [to the good waters] for the good waters Mazda-made.
And I offer this Haoma-water with scrupulous exactness and with
sanctity, and this fresh milk, and the plant Hadhanaepata uplifted
with a complete and sacred offering for the propitiation of the
waters which are Mazda-made.

4. And I offer this Baresman with its Zaothra (and with its binding)
for a girdle spread with complete sanctity and order for the propitiation
of the Bountiful Immortals, and I offer with my voice the thoughts
well-thought, the words well-spoken, and the deeds well-done,
and the heard recital of the Gathas, the Mathras well-composed
and well-delivered, and this Lordship, and this Sanctity, and
this ritual mastership, and the timely Prayer for blessings, with
a complete and sacred offering for the propitiation of the holy
Yazads, heavenly and earthly, and for the contentment of the individual
soul!

5. And I offer to the Asnya with a complete and sacred offering,
as lords of the ritual order, and to Havani, and to Savanghi and
Visya, holy lords of the ritual order, and to Mithra of the wide
pastures, of the thousand ears, and myriad eyes, the Yazad of
the spoken name, and to Raman Hvastra.

6. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to Rapithwina,
the holy lord of the ritual order; and I offer to Fradat-fshu
and to the Zantuma, and to Asha Vahishta (who is Righteousness
the Best) and to Ahura Mazda's Fire.

7. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to Uzayeirina,
Fradat-vira, and to the Dahvyuma*, the holy lord of the ritual
order, and to that lofty Ahura Napat-apam, and to the waters which
Mazda created.

8. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to Aiwisruthrima,
the life-furtherer, and to Fradat-vispam-hujyaiti, and to the
Zarathushtrotema, and to the Fravashis of the saints, and to the
women who have many sons, and to the Prosperous home-life which
endures (without reverse) throughout the year, and to Force, the
well-shaped and stately, and to the Blow which smites with victory
Ahura-given, and to the Victorious Ascendency (which it secures).

9. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to Ushahina,
the holy lord of the ritual order, and to Berejya, and Nmanya,
and to Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, endowed with sanctity,
who smites with the blow of victory, and makes the settlements
advance, and to Rashnu the most just, and to Arshtat who furthers
the settlements and causes them to increase.

10. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to the Mahya,
lords of the ritual order, to the new and the waning moon (the
moon within), and to the full moon which scatters night, holy
lords of the ritual order.

11. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to the Yearly
festivals, the lords of the ritual order, to Maidhyo-zaremaya,
and Maidhyo-shema, to Paitishahya, and to Ayathrima the furtherer
(the breeder), the spender of the strength of males, and to Maidhyairya
and Hamaspathmaedhaya, holy lords of the ritual order, and I offer
with sanctity to the several seasons, the lords of the ritual
order.

12. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to all those
lords who are the thirty and three, who approach the nearest round
about our Havani, and who are the lords of Asha (the ritual by-eminence),
of Righteousness who is (the Best), whose observances are inculcated
as precepts by Mazda, and uttered forth by Zarathushtra. 13. And
I offer with a complete and sacred offering to Ahura and Mithra,
the lofty and imperishable, and holy two, and to the stars which
are the creatures of Spenta Mainyu, and to the star Tishtrya,
the radiant, the glorious, and to the Moon which contains the
seed of cattle in its beams, and to the resplendent Sun of the
fleet horses, the eye of Ahura Mazda, and to Mithra, the lord
of the provinces. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering
to Ahura Mazda, the resplendent, the glorious, (who rules this
day), and to the Fravashis of the saints (who name the month).

14. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to thee, the
Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son! together with all the fires, and to
the good waters, even to the waters which are Mazda-made, and
to all the plants which Mazda made.

15. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to the Mathra
Spenta, the holy, the effective, revealed against the Daevas,
the Zarathushtrian law, and to the long descent of the good Religion,
of the Mazdayasnian faith.

16. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to Mount Ushi-darena,
the Mazda-made, brilliant with holiness, and to all the mountains
shining with holiness, of abundant brightness, and which Mazda
made, and to the Royal glory unconsumed and Mazda-made. And I
offer with a complete and sacred offering to Ashi Vanguhi, and
to Chishti Vanguhi, and to Erethe, and to Rasastat, and to the
Glory (and the) Benefit which Mazda made.

17. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to the good
and pious Prayer for blessings of the pious man, and to that Yazad,
the swift and dreadful Curse of the wise.

18. And I offer with a complete and sacred blessing to these places,
districts, pastures, and abodes with their springs of water, and
to the waters and the lands, and the plants, and to this earth
and yon heaven, and to the holy wind, and to the stars, and the
moon, even to the stars without beginning (to their course), the
self-appointed, and to all the holy creatures of Spenta Mainyu,
be they male or female, regulators (as they are) of the ritual
order.

19. And I offer with a complete and sacred blessing to that lofty
lord who is Righteousness (the Best) and the Day-lords, the lords
of the days during their duration, and to those of the days during
daylight, and to the Month-lords, and the Year-lords, and to those
of the seasons, the lords who are lords of the ritual, and at
the time of Havani.

20. And I offer the Myazda meat-offering with a complete and sacred
offering, and Haurvatat (who guards the water), and Ameretatat
(who guards the wood), and the flesh of the Kine of blessed gift,
for the propitiation of Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, whose
body is the Mathra, him of the daring spear, the lordly, the Yazad
of the spoken name.

21. And I offer the Haoma and the Haoma-juice for the propitiation
of the Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama the saint, the Yazad of
the spoken name.

And I offer the wood-billets with the perfume for Thy propitiation,
the Fire's, Ahura Mazda's son, the Yazad of the spoken name.

22. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to the Fravashis
of the saints, the mighty and overwhelming, to those of the saints
of the ancient lore, and to those of the next of kin.

23. And I offer with a complete and sacred offering to all the
lords of the ritual order, and to all the good Yazads heavenly
and earthly who are (meet) for sacrifice and homage because of
Asha who is Vahishta (of Righteousness who is the Best).

24. May that approach to us, and with a sacred blessing (O Lord!)
whose benefits the offerers are seeking for. Thy praisers and
Mathra-speakers, O Ahura Mazda! may we be named; we desire it,
and such may we be. What reward, O Ahura Mazda! adapted to myself
Thou hast appointed unto souls,

25. Of this do Thou Thyself bestow upon us for this world and
for that of mind; (yea, do Thou bestow) so much of this as that
we may attain to Thy ruling protection and to that of Righteousness
for ever.

26. We sacrifice to the Ahuna-vairya and to the veracious word
correctly uttered, and to the good and pious prayer for blessings,
and to the dreadful curse of the wise, the Yazad, and to Haurvatat
and Ameretatat, and to the flesh of the Kine of blessed gift,
and to the Haoma and Haoma-juice, and to the wood-billets, and
the perfume, for the praise of the pious and good prayer for blessings.

(The Yenghe hatam:)

27. (To that one) of beings do we sacrifice whose superior (fidelity)
in the sacrifice Ahura Mazda knows through his Righteousness (within
him, yea, even to those female saints do we sacrifice) whose (superior
sanctity is thus known. We sacrifice to all) both males and females
whose (superiority is such).

(The Ratu speaks.) As an Ahu (revered and) to be chosen, he who is the Zaotar speaks
forth to me.

(The Zaotar.) So let the Ratu from his Righteousness, holy and learned, speak
forth!

8.

OFFERING OF THE MEAT-OFFERING IN PARTICULAR. THE FAITHFUL PARTAKE.

1. A blessing is Righteousness (called) the Best.

It is weal; it is weal to this (man),

When toward Righteousness Best there is right.

I offer the Myazda (of the) meat-offering with a complete and
sacred offering; and I offer Haurvatatat (who guards the water),
and Ameretatat (who guards the plants and the wood), and the flesh
of the blessed Kine; and I offer the Haoma and the Haoma-juice,
the wood-billets and the perfume for the praise of Ahura Mazda,
and of the Ahuna-vairya, the veracious word, and for that of the
pious and beneficent Prayer for blessings, and for the redoubted
Curse of the wise, and for the praise of the Haoma, and of the
Mathra of the holy Zarathushtra; and may it come to us with sacred
fullness (to accept and to recompense our gift).

2. (The Ratu speaks.) Eat, O ye men, of this Myazda, the meat-offering,
ye who have deserved it by your righteousness and correctness.

3. O ye Bountiful Immortals, and thou, the Mazdayasnian law,
ye just men and just women, and ye Zaothras, whoever among these
Mazdayasnians would call himself a Mazdayasnian desiring to live
in the practice of the liberality of Righteousness [for by sorcery
the settlements of Righteousness are ruined], do ye cause (such
an one) to be (still further) taught
, (ye), who are the waters,
the plants, and the Zaothras!

1. Hum2 159 (mazdayasnO aoJanO aCah= rA+ma JIctayamnO):
"pretending to be a Mazdayasnian (but) *hating (those
who are) *dependent on truth"

4. And whoever of these Mazdayasnians, adults, when he invokes
with earnestness, does not adhere to these words, and (so) speaks,
he approaches to that (word) of the magician; (but, as against
that magician's word) 'a blessing is Righteousness (called) the
Best.'

5. May'st Thou, O Ahura Mazda! reign at Thy will, and with a
saving rule over Thine own creatures, and render Ye the holy (man)
also a sovereign at his will over waters, and over plants, and
over all the clean and sacred (creatures) which contain the seed
of Righteousness. Strip ye the wicked of all power!

2. Hum2 90 (xCayamnem aCavanem dAyata axCayamnem drva#tem):
"cause You the truthful one to be in control (of himself),
the deceitful one not to be in control (of himself)"

6. Absolute in power may the holy be, bereft of all free choice
the wicked ! Gone (may he be), met as foe, carried out from the
creatures of Spenta Mainyu, hemmed in without power over any wish!

7. I will incite, even I who am Zarathushtra, the heads of the
houses, villages, Zantus, and provinces, to the careful following
of this Religion which is that of Ahura, and according to Zarathushtra,
in their thoughts, their words, and their deeds.

3. Hum2 183 (haxCaya ... fratem& ... ai*h@ da%nay@ anumataya%ja
anuxtaya%ja anuvarctaya%ja): "I would spur on the authorities
... to follow this religion with thoughts, word, and actions"

8. I pray for the freedom and glory of the entire existence of
the holy (man) while I bless it, and I pray for the repression
and shame of the entire existence of the wicked.

9. Ashem Vohu ... (3).

Propitiation to Haoma who brings righteousness (to us) for
sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and for praise. (The Zaotar?)
As the Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, the Zaotar speaks forth
to me. (The Ratu.) As an Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, the Zaotar
speaks forth to me. (The Zaotar.) So let the Ratu from his Righteousness,
holy and learned, speak forth!

THE HOM YASHT

9.

1. At the hour of Havani, Haoma came to Zarathushtra, as he served
the (sacred) Fire, and sanctified (its flame), while he sang aloud
the Gathas. And Zarathushtra asked him: Who art thou, O honorable one
! who art
of all the incarnate world the most beautiful in Thine own body of those
whom I have, seen, (thou) glorious [immortal]?

1. So Hum2 138; Mills has 'O man'.

2. Thereupon gave Haoma answer, the holy one who driveth death
afar: I am, O Zarathushtra Haoma, the holy and driving death afar;
pray to me, O Spitama, prepare me for the taste. Praise me so that
also the other Saoshyants [benefactors] may praise me
.

2. So Hum2 74. Mills reads. 'Praise toward
me in (Thy) praises as the other [Saoshyants] praise.'

3. Thereupon spake Zarathushtra: Unto Haoma be the praise. What
man, O Haoma! first prepared thee for the corporeal world? What
award
was offered him? what gain did he acquire?

3. (ashish) Mills relates Ashi to Asha and reads 'blessedness'.

4. Thereupon did Haoma answer me, he the holy one, and driving
death afar: Vivanghvant was the first of men who prepared me for
the incarnate world. This award
was offered him; this gain
did he acquire, that to him was born a son who was Yima, called
the brilliant, (he of the many flocks, the most glorious of those
yet born, the sunlike-one of men), that he made from his authority
both herds and people free from dying, both plants and waters
free from drought, and men could eat inexhaustible
food.

4. Mills: 'blessedness'.

5. So Malandra, Mills reads 'imperishable'.

5. In the reign of brave
Yima was there neither cold
nor heat, there was neither age nor death, nor envy demon-made.
Like teenagers
walked the two forth, son and father, in
their stature and their form, so long as Yima, son of Vivanghvant
ruled, he of the many herds!

6. (Yimahe xshathre aurvahe) So Malandra, Mills reads 'swift of motion'.
Wolff reads 'Herrschaft' (cf B542).

7. Mills: 'fifteen-yearlings'.

6. Who was the second man, O Haoma! who prepared thee for the
corporeal world? What award
was offered him? what gain did
he acquire?

8. Mills: 'sanctity'.

7. Thereupon gave Haoma answer, he the holy one, and driving
death afar: Athwya was the second who prepared-me for the corporeal
world. This award
was given him, this gain did he acquire,
that to him a son was born, Thraetaona of the mighty clan
,

9. Mills: 'blessedness'.

10. (vîsô sûrayau) Following Gershevitch.
Mills reads 'heroic tribe'. Malandra reads 'mighty house'.

8. Who smote Azhi Dahaka
, three-jawed and triple-headed,
six-eyed, with thousand perceptions
, and of mighty strength, a lie-demon
[druj] of the Daevas, evil for our settlements, and wicked, whom the
evil spirit Angra Mainyu made as the most mighty Druj [against
the corporeal world], and for the murder of (our) settlements,
and to slay the (homes) of Asha!

11. Mills: 'the dragon Dahaka'.

12. (hazanrâ-yaoxshtîm) Mills: 'thousand powers'.

9. Who was the third man, O Haoma! who prepared thee for the
corporeal world? What award
was given him? what gain did
he acquire?

13. Mills: 'blessedness'.

10. Thereupon gave Haoma answer, the holy one, and driving death
afar: Thrita, [the most helpful of the Samids], was the third man
who prepared me for the corporeal world. This award was
given him, this gain did he acquire, that to him two son were
born, Urvakhshaya and Keresaspa, the one a judge confirming order,
the other a youth of great ascendant, curly-haired
, bludgeon-bearing.

14. Mills: 'blessedness'.

15. Mills: 'ringlet-headed'.

11. He who smote the horny dragon swallowing men, and swallowing
horses, poisonous, and green of color over which, as thick as
thumbs are, greenish poison flowed aside, on whose back once Keresaspa
cooked his meat in iron caldron at the noonday meal; and the deadly,
scorched, upstarted, and springing off, dashed out the water as
it boiled. Headlong fled affrighted manly-minded Keresaspa.

12. Who was the fourth man who prepared thee, O Haoma! for the
corporeal world? What blessedness was given him? what gain did
he acquire?

13.
Thereupon gave Haoma answer, he the holy, and driving death
afar: Pourushaspa was the fourth man who prepared me for the corporeal
world. This blessedness was given him, this gain did he acquire,
that thou, O Zarathushtra! wast born to him, the just, in Pourushaspa's
house, the Daeva's foe, the friend of Mazda's lore, (14) famed
in Airyana Vaejah; and thou, O Zarathushtra! didst recite the
first the Ahuna-vairya, four times intoning it, and with verses
kept apart [(Pazand) each time with louder and still louder voice].

15.
And thou didst cause, O Zarathushtra! all the demon-gods to
vanish in the ground who aforetime flew about this earth in human
shape (and power. This hast thou done), thou who hast been the
strongest, and the staunchest, the most active, and the swiftest,
and (in every deed) the most victorious in the two spirits' world.

16.
Thereupon spake Zarathushtra: Praise to Haoma. Good is Haoma,
and the well-endowed, exact and righteous in its nature, and good
inherently, and healing, beautiful of form, and good in deed,
and most successful in its working, golden-hued, with bending
sprouts. As it is the best for drinking, so (through its sacred
stimulus) is it the most nutritious for the soul.

17.
I make my claim on thee, O yellow one! for inspiration. I
make my claim on thee for strength; I make my claim on thee for
victory; I make my claim on thee for health and healing (when
healing is my need); I make my claim on thee for progress and
increased prosperity, and vigor of the entire frame, and for understanding,
of each adorning kind, and for this, that I may have free course
among our settlements, having power where I will, overwhelming
angry malice, and a conqueror of lies.

18.
Yea, I make my claim on thee that I may overwhelm the angry
hate of haters, of the Daevas and of mortals, of the sorcerers
and sirens, of the tyrants, and the Kavis, of the Karpans, murderous
bipeds, of the sanctity-destroyers, the profane apostate bipeds,
of the wolves four-footed monsters, of the invading host, wide-fronted,
which with stratagems advance.

19. This first blessing I beseech of thee, O Haoma, thou that
drivest death afar! I beseech of thee for (heaven), the best life
of the saints, the radiant, all-glorious.

This second blessing I beseech of thee, O Haoma, thou that drivest
death afar! this body's health (before that blest life is attained).

This third blessing I beseech of thee, O Haoma, thou that drivest
death afar! the long vitality of life.

20.
This fourth blessing I beseech of thee, O Haoma, thou that
drivest death afar! that I may stand forth on this earth with
desires gained, and powerful, receiving satisfaction, overwhelming
the assaults of hate, and conquering the lie.

This fifth blessing, O Haoma, I beseech of thee, thou that drivest
death afar! that I may stand victorious on earth, conquering in
battles, overwhelming the assaults of hate, and conquering the
lie.

21.
This sixth blessing I ask of thee, O Haoma, thou that drivest
death afar! that we may get good warning of the thief, good warning
of the murderer, see first the bludgeon-bearer, get first sight
of the wolf. May no one whichsoever get first the sight of us.
In the strife with each may we be they who get the first alarm!

22.
Haoma grants to racers who would run a course with span both
speed and bottom (in their horses). Haoma grants to women come
to bed with child a brilliant offspring and a righteous line.

Haoma grants to those (how many!) who have long sat searching
books, more knowledge and more wisdom.

23.
Haoma grants to those long maidens, who sit at home unwed,
good husbands, and that as soon as asked, he Haoma, the well-minded.

24.
Haoma lowered Keresani, dethroned him from his throne, for
he grew so fond of power, that he treacherously said: No priest
behind (and watching) shall walk the lands for me, as a counselor
to prosper them, he would rob everything of progress, he would
crush the growth of all!

25.
Hail to thee, O Haoma, who hast power as thou wilt, and by
thine inborn strength! Hail to thee, thou art well-versed in many
sayings, and true and holy words. Hail to thee for thou dost ask
no wily questions, but questionest direct.

26.
Forth hath Mazda borne to thee, the star-bespangled girdle,
the spirit-made, the ancient one, the Mazdayasnian Faith.

So with this thou art begirt on the summits of the mountains,
for the spreading of the precepts, and the headings of the Mathra,
(and to help the Mathra's teacher),

27.
O Haoma, thou house-lord, and thou clan-lord, thou tribe-lord,
and chieftain of the land, and thou successful learned teacher,
for aggressive strength I speak to thee, for that which smites
with victory, and for my body's saving, and for manifold delight!

28.
Bear off from us the torment and the malice of the hateful.
Divert the angry foe's intent!

What man soever in this house is violent and wicked, what man
soever in this village, or this tribe, or province, seize thou
away the fleetness from his feet; throw thou a veil of darkness
o'er his mind; make thou his intellect (at once) a wreck!

29.
Let not the man who harms us, mind or body, have power to
go forth on both his legs, or hold with both his hands, or see
with both his eyes, not the land (beneath his feet), or the herd
before his face.

30.
At the aroused and fearful Dragon, green, and belching forth
his poison, for the righteous saint that perishes, yellow Haoma,
hurl thy mace!

At the (murderous) bludgeon-bearer, committing deeds unheard of,
blood-thirsty, (drunk) with fury, yellow Haoma, hurl thy mace!

31.
Against the wicked human tyrant, hurling weapons at the head,
for the righteous saint that perishes, yellow Haoma, hurl thy
mace!

Against the righteousness-disturber, the unholy life-destroyer,
thoughts and words of our religion well-delivering, yet in actions
never reaching, for the righteous saint that perishes, yellow
Haoma, hurl thy mace!

32.
Against the body of the harlot, with her magic minds o'erthrowing
with (intoxicating) pleasures, to the lusts her person offering,
whose mind as vapor wavers as it flies before the wind, for the
righteous saint that perishes, yellow Haoma, hurl thy mace!

10.

1. Let the Demon-gods and Goddesses fly far away from hence,
and let the good Sraosha make here his home! [And may the good
Blessedness here likewise dwell], and may she here spread delight
and peace within this house, Ahura's, which is sanctified by Haoma,
bringing righteousness (to all).

2.
At the first force of thy pressure, O intelligent! I praise
thee with my voice, while I grasp at first thy shoots. At thy
next pressure, O intelligent! I praise thee with my voice, when
as with full force of a man I crush thee down.

3.
I praise the cloud that waters thee, and the rains which make
thee grow on the summits of the mountains; and I praise thy lofty
mountains where the Haoma branches spread.

4.
This wide earth do I praise, expanded far (with paths), the
productive, the full bearing, thy mother, holy plant! Yea, I praise
the lands where thou dost grow, sweet-scented, swiftly spreading,
the good growth of the Lord. O Haoma, thou growest on the mountains,
apart on many paths, and there still may'st thou flourish. The
springs of Righteousness most verily thou art, (and the fountains
of the ritual find their source in thee)!

5.
Grow (then) because I pray to thee on all thy stems and branches,
in all thy shoots (and tendrils) increase thou through my word!

6.
Haoma grows while he is praised, and the man who praises him
is therewith more victorious. The lightest pressure of thee, Haoma,
thy feeblest praise, the slightest tasting of thy juice, avails
to the thousand-smiting of the Daevas.

7.
Wasting doth vanish from that house, and-with it foulness,
whither in verity they bear thee, and where thy praise in truth
is sung, the drink of Haoma, famed, health-bringing (as thou art).
[(Pazand) to his village and abode they bear him.]

8.
All other toxicants go hand in hand with Rapine of the bloody
spear, but Haoma's stirring power goes hand in hand with friendship.
[Light is the drunkenness of Haoma (Pazand).]

Who as a tender son caresses Haoma, forth to the bodies of such
persons Haoma comes to heal.

9.
Of all the healing virtues, Haoma, whereby thou art a healer,
grant me some. Of all the victorious powers, whereby thou art
a victor, grant me some. A faithful praiser will I be to thee,
O Haoma, and a faithful praiser (is) a better (thing) than Righteousness
the Best; so hath the Lord, declaring (it), decreed.

10.
Swift and wise hath the well-skilled Deity created thee; swift
and wise on high Haraiti did He, the well-skilled, plant thee.

11.
And taught (by implanted instinct) on every side, the bounteous
birds have carried thee to the Peaks-above-the-eagles, to the
mount's extremest summit, to the gorges and abysses, to the heights
of many pathways, to the snow-peaks ever whitened.

12.
There, Haoma, on the ranges dost thou grow of many kinds.
Now thou growest of milky whiteness, and now thou growest golden;
and forth thine healing liquors flow for the inspiring of the
pious. So terrify away from me the (death's) aim of the curser.
So terrify and crush his thought who stands as my maligner.

13.
Praise be to thee, O Haoma, (for he makes the poor man's thoughts
as great as any of the richest whomsoever.) Praise be to Haoma,
(for he makes the poor man's thoughts as great as when mind reacheth
culmination.) With manifold retainers dost thou, O Haoma, endow
the man who drinks thee mixed with milk; yea, more prosperous
thou makest him, and more endowed with mind.

14.
Do not vanish from me suddenly like milk-drops in the rain;
let thine exhilarations go forth ever vigorous and fresh; and
let them come to me with strong effect. Before thee, holy Haoma,
thou bearer of the ritual truth, and around thee would I cast
this body, a body which (as all) may see (is fit for gift and)
grown.

15.
I renounce with vehemence the murderous woman's emptiness,
the Jaini's, hers, with intellect dethroned. She vainly thinks
to foil us, and would beguile both Fire-priest and Haoma; but
she herself, deceived therein, shall perish. And when she sits
at home, and wrongly eats of Haoma's offering, priest's mother
will that never make her, nor give her holy sons!

16.
To five do I belong, to five others do I not; of the good
thought am I, of the evil am I not; of the good word am I, of
the evil am I not; of the good deed am I, and of the evil, not.

To Obedience am I given, and to deaf disobedience, not; to the
saint do I belong, and to the wicked, not; and so from this on
till the ending shall be the spirits' parting. (The two shall
here divide.)

17.
Thereupon spake Zarathushtra: Praise to Haoma, Mazda-made.
Good is Haoma, Mazda-made. All the plants of Haoma praise I, on
the heights of lofty mountains, in the gorges of the valleys,
in the clefts (of sundered hill-sides) cut for the bundles bound
by women. From the silver cup I pour Thee to the golden chalice
over. Let me not thy (sacred) liquor spill to earth, of precious
cost.

18.
These are thy Gathas, holy Haoma, these thy songs, and these
thy teachings, and these thy truthful ritual words, health-imparting,
victory-giving, from harmful hatred healing giving.

19.
These and thou art mine, and forth let thine exhilarations
flow; bright and sparkling let them hold on their (steadfast)
way; for light are thine exhilaration(s), and flying lightly come
they here. Victory-giving smiteth Haoma, victory-giving is it
worshipped; with this Gathic word we praise it.

20.
Praise to the Kine; praise and victory (be) spoken to her!
Food for the Kine, and pasture! 'For the Kine let thrift use toil;
yield thou us food.'

21.
We worship the yellow lofty one; we worship Haoma who causes
progress, who makes the settlements advance; we worship Haoma
who drives death afar; yea, we worship all the Haoma plants. And
we worship (their) blessedness, and the Fravashi of Zarathushtra
Spitama, the saint.

11.

PRELUDE TO THE HAOMA-OFFERING.

1. Three clean creatures (full of blessings) curse betimes while
yet invoking, the cow, the horse, and then Haoma. The cow cries
to her driver thus: Childless be thou, shorn of offspring evil-famed,
and slander-followed, who foddered fairly dost not use me, but
fattenest me for wife or children, and for thy niggard selfish
meal.

2.
The horse cries to his rider thus: Be not spanner of the racers;
stretch no coursers to full-speed; do not stride across the fleetest,
thou, who dost not pray me swiftness in the meeting thick with
numbers, in the circuit thronged with men.

3.
Haoma speaks his drinker thus: Childless be thou, shorn of
offspring, evil-famed, and slander-followed, who holdest me from
full outpouring, as a robber, skulls in-crushing. No head-smiter
am I ever, holy Haoma, far from death.

4.
Forth my father gave an offering, tongue and left eye chose
Ahura, set apart for Haoma's meal.

5.
Who this offering would deny me, eats himself, or prays it
from me, this which Mazda gave to bless me, tongue with left eye
(as my portion).

6.
In his house is born no fire-priest, warrior ne'er in chariot
standing, never more the thrifty tiller. In his home be born Dahakas,
Murakas of evil practice, doing deeds of double nature.

7.
Quick, cut off then Haoma's portion, gift of flesh for doughty
Haoma! Heed lest Haoma bind thee fettered, as he bound the fell
Turanian Frangrasyan (the murderous robber) fast in iron close-surrounded
in the mid-third of this earth!

8.
Thereupon spake Zarathushtra: Praise to Haoma made by Mazda,
good is Haoma Mazda-made.

9.
Who to us is one hereupon to thee (becomes) two, to be made
to three, for the five-making of the four, for the seven-making
of the sixth, who are your nine in the decade (?), who serve you
and with zeal.

10. To thee, O holy Haoma! bearer of the ritual sanctity, I offer
this my person which is seen (by all to be) mature, (and fit for
gift); to Haoma the effective do I offer it, and to the sacred
exhilaration which he bestows; and do thou grant to me (for this),
O holy Haoma! thou that drivest death afar, (Heaven) the best
world of the saints, shining, all brilliant.

11.
(The Ashem Vohu, &c.)

12-15.
May'st Thou rule at Thy will, O Lord....(Repeat Y8.5-7)!

16.
I confess myself a Mazdayasnian of Zarathushtra's order.

17.
I celebrate my praises for good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds for my thoughts, my speeches, and (my) actions. With
chanting praises I present all good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds, and with rejection I repudiate all evil thoughts,
and words, and deeds. 18. Here I give to you, O ye Bountiful Immortals!
sacrifice and homage with the mind, with words, deeds, and my
entire person; yea, (I offer) to you the flesh of my very body
(as your own). And I praise Righteousness. A blessing is Righteousness
(called) the Best, &c.

12. The Zoroastrian Creed.

Translation of this chapter by Joseph H Peterson,

This creed probably dates
to the earliest days of the faith, but seems to have undergone
some linguistic shift and subsequent recasting in the Old Avestan
dialect. It was probably intended to be recited before an open
assembly. See discussion in Boyce,
Zoroastrianism
- Its Antiquity and Constant Vigour,
(Costa Mesa, Mazda Pub, 1992, p. 84 and 104
ff). The last phrase of verse 7, plus all of verses 8 and 9, are
incorporated into the daily
Kusti ritual
.

1. I curse the Daevas.

I declare myself a Mazda-worshipper, a supporter of Zarathushtra,
hostile to the Daevas, fond of Ahura's teaching, a praiser of
the Amesha Spentas, a worshipper of the Amesha Spentas. I ascribe
all good to Ahura Mazda, 'and all the best,' Asha-endowed,
splendid, xwarena-endowed, whose is the cow, whose is Asha, whose
is the light, 'may whose blissful areas be filled with light'.

2.
I choose the good Spenta Armaiti for myself; let her be mine.
I renounce the theft and robbery of the cow, and the damaging
and plundering of the Mazdayasnian settlements.

3.
I want freedom of movement and freedom of dwelling for those
with homesteads, to those who dwell upon this earth with their
cattle. With reverence for Asha, and (offerings) offered up, I
vow this: I shall nevermore damage or plunder the Mazdayasnian
settlements, even if I have to risk life and limb.

4.
I reject the authority of the Daevas, the wicked, no-good,
lawless, evil-knowing, the most druj-like of beings, the foulest
of beings, the most damaging of beings. I reject the Daevas and
their comrades, I reject the demons (yatu) and their comrades;
I reject any who harm beings. I reject them with my thoughts,
words, and deeds. I reject them publicly.

Even as I reject the head (authorities), so too do I reject
the hostile followers of the druj.

5.
As Ahura Mazda taught Zarathushtra at all discussions, at
all meetings, at which Mazda and Zarathushtra conversed;

6.
as Ahura Mazda taught Zarathushtra at all discussions, at
all meetings, at which Mazda and Zarathushtra conversed — even
as Zarathushtra rejected the authority of the Daevas, so I also
reject, as Mazda-worshipper and supporter of Zarathushtra, the
authority of the Daevas, even as he, the Asha-endowed Zarathushtra,
has rejected them.

7.
As the belief of the waters, the belief of the plants, the
belief of the well-made (Original) Cow; as the belief of Ahura
Mazda who created the cow and the Asha-endowed Man; as the belief
of Zarathushtra, the belief of Kavi Vishtaspa, the belief of both
Frashaostra and Jamaspa; as the belief of each of the Saoshyants
(saviors) — fulfilling destiny and Asha-endowed —

so I am a Mazda-worshipper
of this belief and teaching.

8.
I profess myself a Mazda-worshipper, a Zoroastrian, having
vowed it and professed it. I pledge myself to the well-thought
thought, I pledge myself to the well-spoken word, I pledge myself
to the well-done action.

9.
I pledge myself to the Mazdayasnian religion, which causes
the attack to be put off and weapons put down; [which upholds khvaetvadatha],
Asha-endowed; which of all religions that exist or shall be, is the greatest,
the best, and the most beautiful: Ahuric, Zoroastrian. I ascribe all good to
Ahura Mazda.
This is the creed of the Mazdayasnian religion.

13.

INVOCATIONS AND DEDICATIONS.

Y13.1-6 and the beginning of 7 is in the Old Avesta dialect.

1. I address (my invocation to) Ahura Mazda. And I invoke (among
guardian beings) the chief of the house-lord, and the chief of
the Vis-lord, and the chief of the Zantu-lord. And I invoke the
chief of the province-lord. And the chief of women I invoke, the
Mazdayasnian Faith, the blessed and good Parendi, her who is the
holy one of human-kind. And I invoke this (holy) earth which bears
us.

2.
And I invoke the friendly and most helpful person's lord,
the Fire of Ahura Mazda, and also the most energetic lords of
holy men, those who are most strenuous in their care of cattle
and the fields, and the chief of the thrifty tiller of the earth.
And I invoke the steady settler of sanctity, (and) the chief of
the charioteer.

3.
And I invoke the chief of the fire-priest by means of the
most imposing sciences of the Mazdayasnian Faith. And I invoke
the chief of the Atharvan, and his pupils I invoke; yea, the lords
of each of them. I invoke these lords, and I summon the Bountiful
Immortals here, and the Prophets who shall serve us, the wisest
as they are, the most scrupulous in their exactness (as) they
utter words (of doctrine and of service), the most devoted (to
their duties likewise), and the most glorious in their thoughts(?).
And I invoke the most imposing forces of the Mazdayasnian Faith,
and the fire-priests I invoke, and the charioteers, the warriors,
and the thrifty tillers of the soil.

4.
And to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! Ye who rule aright,
and dispose (of all) aright, I offer the flesh of my very frame,
and all the blessings of my life.

Thus the two spirits thought, thus they spoke, and thus they did;

5.
And therefore as Thou, O Ahura Mazda! didst think, speak,
dispose, and do all things good (for us), so to Thee would we
give, so would we assign to Thee our homage; so would we worship
Thee with our sacrifices. So would we bow before Thee with these
gifts, and so direct our prayers to Thee with confessions of our
debt.

6.
By the kinship of the good kindred, by that of Righteousness
the good (Thy righteous servant's nature) would we approach Thee,
and by that of the good thrift-law, and of Piety the good.

7.
And we would worship the Fravashi of the Kine of blessed gift,
and that of the holy Gaya Mareyan [Gayomard], and we would worship the holy
Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama, the saint. Yea, that one of
beings do we worship whose better (service) in the sacrifice Ahura
Mazda knows; (even those women do we worship) whose (better service
thus is known). Yea, both (holy) men and women (do we worship
whom Ahura Mazda knows).

As the Ahu is excelling....

A blessing is the Right called the best....

8.
We worship the Ahuna-vairya; and we worship Asha Vahishta
the best(?), the bountiful Immortal. And we sacrifice to the Ha
fraoreti, even to the confession and laudation of the Mazdayasnian
Faith!

14.

DEDICATIONS.

1.
I will come to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! as a praiser
and a priest, and an invoker and sacrificer, as a memorizing reciter
and a chanter, for Your sacrifice and homage, which are to be
offered to You, the Bountiful Immortals, and for our dedication
and sanctification; (yea, for ours) who are the holy prophets
(destined to benefit the saints).

2.
And to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! would I dedicate the
flesh of my very body, and all the blessings of a prospered life.

3.
In this Zaothra with this Baresman, I desire to approach the
holy Yazads with my praise, and all the holy lords of the ritual
order at their times, Havani at his time, and Savanghi and Visya
at their times. 4. I confess myself a Mazdayasnian, and of Zarathushtra's
order.

5.
The Zaotar speaks: As an Ahu (revered and) chosen, the Zaotar
(?) speaks forth to me (?).

The Ratu speaks: As an Ahu (revered and) to be chosen, the Zaotar
speaks forth to me.

The Zaotar: So let the Ratu from his Righteousness, holy and learned,
speak forth!

15.

THE SACRIFICE CONTINUES.

1.
With precept, praise, and with delight produced by grace,
I call upon the Bountiful Immortals the good, and also therewith
the beautiful by name; and I sacrifice to them with the blessing
of the good ritual, with the earnest blessings of the good Mazdayasnian
Faith.

2.
Whose best gift from his Righteousness is mine in the offering
Ahura this knoweth; who have lived, and live ever, by their names
these I worship, while I draw near with praises. The Good Kingdom
is to be chosen, that lot which most of all bears on (our blessings).

3.
Let Sraosha (Obedience) be here present for the sacrifice
of Ahura Mazda, the most beneficent, the holy, who is so dear
to us as at the first, so at the last; yea, let him be present
here.

4.
As the Ahu (revered and) to be chosen, the Atarevakhsha thus
speaks forth to me.

(Response): So let the Ratu from his righteousness, holy and learned,
speak forth!

16.

THE SACRIFICE CONTINUES WITH INCREASED FULLNESS OF EXPRESSION.

1. We worship Ahura Mazda, the holy lord of the ritual order,
who disposes (all) aright, the greatest Yazad, who is also the
most beneficent, and the one who causes the settlements to advance,
the creator of good creatures; yea, we worship Him with these
offered Zaothras and with truthfully and scrupulously delivered
words; and we worship every holy Yazad of the heaven (as well)!

2.
And we worship Zarathushtra Spitama in our sacrifice, the
holy lord of the ritual order with these Zaothras and with faithfully
delivered words; and we worship every holy earthly Yazad as we
worship him; and we worship also the Fravashi of Zarathushtra
Spitama, the saint. And we worship the utterances of Zarathushtra
and his religion, his faith and his lore.

3.
And we worship the former religions of the world devoted to
Righteousness which were instituted at the creation, the holy
religions of the Creator Ahura Mazda, the resplendent and glorious.
And we worship Vohu Manah (the Good Mind), and Asha Vahishta (who
is Righteousness the Best), and Khshathra-vairya, the Kingdom
to be desired, and the good and bountiful Armaiti (true piety
in the believers), and Haurvatat and Ameretat (our Weal and Immortality).

4.
Yea, we worship the Creator Ahura Mazda and the Fire, Ahura
Mazda's son, and the good waters which are Mazda-made and holy,
and the resplendent sun of the swift horses, and the moon with
the seed of cattle (in his beams); and we worship the star Tishtrya,
the lustrous and glorious; and we worship the soul of the Kine
of blessed endowment, (5) and its Creator Ahura Mazda; and we
worship Mithra of the wide pastures, and Sraosha (Obedience) the
blessed, and Rashnu the most just, and the good, heroic, bountiful
Fravashis of the saints, and the Blow-of-victory Ahura-given (as
it is). And we worship Raman Hvastra, and the bounteous Wind of
blessed gift, (6) and (its) Creator Ahura Mazda, and the good
Mazdayasnian Religion, and the good Blessedness and Arshtat.

And we worship the heaven and the earth of blessed gift, and the
bounteous Mathra, and the stars without beginning (to their course),
self-disposing as they are.

7.
And we worship the glorious works of Righteousness in which
the souls of the dead find satisfaction and delight [(Pazand)
which are the Fravashis of the saints], and we worship (Heaven)
the best world of the saints, shining, all glorious.

8.
And we worship the two, the milk-offering and the libation,
the two which cause the waters to flow forth, and the plants to
flourish, the two foes who meet the Dragon demon-made; and who
are set to meet, to defeat, and to put to flight, that cheat,
the Pairika, and to contradict the insulting malice of the Ashemaogha
(the persecuting heretic) and that of the unholy tyrant full of
death.

9.
And we worship all waters and all plants, and all good men
and all good women. And we worship all these Yazads, heavenly
and earthly, who are beneficent and holy.

10.
And we worship thee (our) dwelling-place who art the (earth,
our) bounteous Armaiti, and Thee, O Ahura Mazda, O holy Lord of
this abode! which is the home of healthy herds and healthy men,
and of those who are both endowed with health and lover(s) of
the ritual right.

(Response of the individual worshipper (?).) Wherefore whichever
of persons, or whatever of bodily influences, is most helpful
and preserving in that abode (thus owned by Mazda) let this meet
me in mine abode, and there may it abide for summer and for winter.
(Or let that one meet me in all my house, in whom are what of
influences are the most mighty power for the body and the person's
life; yea, let that one meet me there, and there abide for summer
and for winter (for my help)!)

17.

TO THE FIRES, WATERS, PLANTS, &C.

1-10.
(See
Y6
, which is nearly identical with verses 1-10.)

11.
We worship thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son! We worship
the fire Berezi-savangha (of the lofty use), and the fire Vohu-fryana
(the good and friendly), and the fire Urvazishta (the most beneficial
and most helpful), and the fire Vazishta (the most supporting),
and the fire Spenishta (the most bountiful), and Nairya-sangha
the Yazad of the royal lineage, and that fire which is the house-lord
of all houses and Mazda-made, even the son of Ahura Mazda, the
holy lord of the ritual order, with all the fires.

12.
And we worship the good and best waters Mazda-made, holy,
all the waters Mazda-made and holy, and all the plants which Mazda
made, and which are holy.

13.
And we worship the Mathra-spenta (the bounteous word-of-reason),
the Zarathushtrian law against the Daevas, and its long descent.

14.
And we worship Mount Ushi-darena which is Mazda-made and shining
with its holiness, and all the mountains shining with holiness,
and of abundant glory, and which Mazda made ---.

15.
And we worship the good and pious prayer for blessings, (16)
and these waters and (these lands), (17) and all the greatest
chieftains, lords of the ritual order;

18.
And I praise, invoke, and glorify the good, heroic, bountiful
Fravashis of the saints, those of the house, the Vis, the Zantuma,
the Dahvyuma, and the Zarathushtrotema, and all the holy Yazads!

18.

1.
Grant me, Thou who art maker of the Kine, plants and waters,
Immortality, Mazda! Grant, too, Weal, Spirit bounteous.... (See
Y51.7 and Y47).

19.

ZAND OR COMMENTARY ON THE AHUNA-VAIRYA FORMULAS.

(As the Ahu is excellent, so (is) the Ratu (one who rules)
from the righteous Order, a creator of mental goodness and of
life's actions done for Mazda; and the Kingdom (is) for Ahura
which to the poor shall offer a nurturer.)

1.
Zarathushtra asked of Ahura Mazda: O Ahura Mazda, Thou most
bounteous Spirit! maker of the corporeal worlds, the holy One!
which was that word which Thou did'st declare to me, (2) which
was before the sky, and before the water, before the earth, and
before the cattle, before the plants, and before the fire, and
before the holy man, and the Demon-gods (the Daevas), before the
Khrafstra-men, and before all the incarnate world; even before
all the good creatures made by Mazda, and which contain (and are)
the seed of righteousness?

3.
Thereupon Ahura Mazda said: It was this piece, the Ahuna-vairya,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! which I pronounced as thine (4) before
the sky, and before the waters, before the land, and before the
cattle and the plants, and before the fire, Ahura Mazda's son,
before the holy man, and before the Daevas, and Khrafstra-men,
and before the entire corporeal world, even before the good creatures
made by Mazda, which contain (and are) the seed of righteousness.

5.
It was these part(s) of the Ahuna-vairya, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
which especially belongs to me, and when each is intoned aloud
without the (needless) repetition of verses and of words, and
without their omission, it is worth a hundred of their other stanzas,
even although they are prominent in the ritual, and likewise equally
as well recited without additions or omissions; nay, further,
when it is intoned imperfectly but added to, and with omissions,
it is even then in effect equivalent (not to a hundred indeed,
but) to ten other (stanzas) that are prominent.

6.
And whoever in this world of mine which is corporeal shall
mentally recall, O Spitama* Zarathushtra! a portion of the Ahuna-vairya,
and having thus recalled it, shall undertone it, or beginning
to recite it with the undertone, shall then utter it aloud, or
chanting it with intoning voice, shall worship thus, then with
even threefold (safety and with speed) I will bring his soul over
the Bridge of Chinvat, I who am Ahura Mazda (I will help him to
pass over it) to Heaven (the best life), and to Righteousness
the Best, and to the lights of heaven.

7.
And whoever, O Spitama Zarathushtra! while undertoning the
part(s) of the Ahuna-vairya (or this piece the Ahuna-vairya),
takes ought therefrom, whether the half, or the third, or the
fourth, or the fifth, I who am Ahura Mazda will draw his soul
off from the better world; yea, so far off will I withdraw it
as the earth is large and wide; [and this earth is as long as
it is broad].

8.
And I pronounced this saying which contains its Ahu and its
Ratu before the creation of this heaven, before the making of
the waters, and the plants, and the four-footed kine, before the
birth of the holy biped man, before this sun with its body made
for the acquisition of the creation of the Bountiful Immortals.

9.
And the more bountiful of the two Spirits (Ahura) declared
to me (Zarathushtra) the entire creation of the pure, that which
exists at present, that which is in the course of emerging into
existence, and that which shall be, with reference to the performance
and realization 'of the actions of a life devoted to Mazda.'

10.
And this word is the most emphatic of the words which have
ever been pronounced, or which are now spoken, or which shall
be spoken in future; for (the eminence of) this utterance is a
thing of such a nature, that if all the corporeal and living world
should learn it, and learning should hold fast by it, they would
be redeemed from their mortality!

11.
And this our word I have proclaimed as a symbol to be learned,
and to be recited, as it were, to every one of the beings under
the influence of and for the sake of Righteousness the Best.

12.
And 'as' (the worshipper has) here spoken it forth, when he
has thus 'appointed' the 'Lord and regulator,' so (by thus reciting
these authoritative words), he acknowledges Ahura Mazda (as prior
to, and supreme) over, those creatures who have 'the mind' as
their first. 'As' he acknowledges Him as the greatest of them
all, 'so' he assigns the creatures to Him (as to their originator).

13.
As he undertones the third sentence, he thereby announces
that 'all the amenities of life appertain to the 'good' Mazda,
(and come) from Him. As he recites 'dazda manangho,' 'the creator
of mind,' he acknowledges Him as superior and prior to mind; and
as he makes Him the one who indicates (the truth) to mind, (saying)
'manangho of mind,' which means that by this much he makes Him
(its director), and then he makes Him 'the lord of actions.'

14.
And when he acknowledges Him for the creatures thus, 'O Mazda!'
he acknowledges Him (as their ruler) when he assigns the creatures
to Him thus. He then assigns the Kingdom to Ahura, saying: 'Thine,
O Mazda! is the Kingdom.' And he assigns a nourisher and protector
to the poor, saying: Yim drigubyo dadat vastarem; that is, as
a friend to Spitama. This is the fifth sentence, (and it concludes)
the entire recital and word, (even) the whole of this word of
Ahura Mazda.

15. He who is the best (of all) Ahura Mazda, pronounced the Ahuna-vairya,
and as He pronounced it as the best, so He caused it to have its
effect, (He, ever) the same, (as He is).

The evil one at once arose (to oppose Him), but He (Ahura) repelled
that wicked one with His interdict, and with this repelling renunciation:
Neither our minds are in harmony, nor our precepts, nor our comprehensions,
nor our beliefs, nor our words, nor our actions, nor our consciences,
nor our souls!

CATECHETICAL ZAND.

16.
And this saying, uttered by Mazda, has three stages, or measures,
and belongs to four classes (of men as its supporters), and to
five chiefs (in the political world, without whom its efficiency
is marred), and it has a conclusion ending with a gift. (Question.)
How are its measures (constituted)? (Answer.) The good thought,
the good word, and the good deed. 17. (Question.) With what classes
of men? (Answer.) The priest, the charioteer (as the chief of
warriors), the systematic tiller of the ground, and the artisan.
These classes therefore accompany the religious man throughout
his entire duty with the correct thought, the truthful word, and
the righteous action. These are the classes and states in life
which give attention to the rulers, and fulfill the (laws) of
religion; (yea, they are the guides and companions of that religious
man) through whose actions the settlements are furthered in righteousness.

18.
(Question.) How are the chiefs (constituted)? (Answer.) They
are the house-chief, the village-chief, and the tribe-chief, the
chief of the province, and the Zarathushtra as the fifth. That
is, so far as those provinces are concerned which are different
from, and outside of the Zarathushtrian regency, or domain. [Ragha
which has four chiefs (only) is the Zarathushtrian (district)]
(Question.) How are the chiefs of this one constituted? (Answer.)
They (are) the house-chief, the village-chief, the tribe-chief,
and the Zarathushtra as the fourth. 19. (Question.) What is the
thought well thought? (Answer.) (It is that which the holy man
thinks), the one who holds the holy thought to be before all other
things (Question.) What is the word well spoken? (Answer.) It
is the Mathra Spenta, the bounteous word of reason. (Question.)
What is the deed well done? (Answer.) It is that done with praises,
and by the creatures who regard Righteousness as before all other
things. 20. (Question.) Mazda made a proclamation, whom did He
announce? (Answer.) Some one who was holy, and yet both heavenly
and mundane. (Question.) What was His character, He who made this
sacred enunciation? (Answer.) He who is the best (of all), the
ruling one. (Question.) Of what character (did He proclaim him
the coming one)? (Answer.) As holy and the best, a ruler who exercises
no wanton or despotic power.

21.
We sacrifice to the (several) part(s) of the Ahuna-vairya.
We sacrifice to the memorized recital of the Ahuna-vairya, and
its regular chanting and its use in the full Yasna.

20.

ZAND, OR COMMENTARY, ON THE ASHEM VOHU.

1.
A blessing is Righteousness (called) the best; there is weal,
there is weal to this man when the Right (helps) the Righteousness
best, (when the pious man serves it in truth). Ahura Mazda spake
forth: Ashem vohu vahishtem asti. To this Asha, the holy ritual
sanctity, one attributes the qualities of 'good' and 'best,' as
one attributes property to an owner; thus this sentence vohu vahishtem
asti is substantiated (at once).

2.
Ushta asti ushta ahmai; by this attribution of blessedness
(the praiser) assigns every person (or thing) of a sacred nature
to every holy person, and as one usually (?) and regularly (?)
assigns every person or thing (?) that is holy to every holy man.

3.
Hyat ashai vahishtai; by these words the worshipper ascribes
the entire Mathra (to Asha Vahishta), and ascribes all to the
Mathra, as one ascribes the kingdom to Righteousness, and as one
ascribes righteousness to the invoking saint; yea, as one ascribes
righteousness to us who are the prophets (who shall help and bless
the people). The three maxims of the sentences (are thus fulfilled).
And every word (in its detail), and the entire utterance in its
proclamation, is the word of Ahura Mazda.

CATECHETICAL ADDITION.

4.
Mazda has made a proclamation. (Question.) Whom did He announce?
(Answer.) That holy one who is both heavenly and earthly. (Question.)
Of what character is He who has thus announced Him? (Answer.)
He is the best, and the one who is exercising sovereign power.
(Question.) Of what character is the man whom He announced? (Answer.)
The holy and the best, the one who rules with no capricious tyranny.

We sacrifice to the (several) part(s) of the Asha Vahishta (prayer).
We sacrifice to the heard-recital of the Asha Vahishta, to its
memorizing, its chanting, and its sacrificial use!

21.

CATECHETICAL ZAND, OR COMMENTARY UPON THE YENHE HATAM.

(The Yenhe. (To that one) of beings do we offer, whose superior
(fidelity) in the sacrifice Ahura Mazda recognizes by reason of
the sanctity (within him; yea, even to those female saints also
do we sacrifice) whose (superior fidelity is thus likewise known;
thus) we sacrifice to (all, to both) the males and females (of
the saints)!)

1.
A word for the Yasna by Zarathushtra, the saint, Yenhe, &c.
Here the worshipper indicates and offers the Yasna (which is the
sacrificial worship) of Mazda as by the command (or as the institution)
of Ahura. Hatam. Here the worshipper offers the sacrificial worship
as if with the beings who are among those who are destined to
live. 2. Yaungham. Here he indicates and offers the sacrificial
worship of those holy females who have Aramaiti at their head,
as homage to the Immortals. These are the three sentences which
comprehend all the Yasnian speech. (Question.) To whom is this
Yasna addressed? (Answer.) To the Bountiful Immortals (in the
course of the Yasna). 3. Thereupon spake Mazda: Salvation to this
one, whosoever he may be! May the absolute ruler Ahura grant it.
(Question.) 4. Whom did He answer with this answer? (Answer.)
He answered: The state of salvation; and with this answer, 'the
state of salvation,' he answered every saint who exists, every
one who is coming into existence, and every one who shall exist
in the future. (Question. Who answered thus? Answer.) The best
One. (Question. What did He answer?) (Answer.) The best thing.
(That is,) the best One, Mazda, answered the best and the holy
(answer) for the better and the holy man. 5. We sacrifice to this
piece, the Yenhe hatam, the prominent and holy Yasht.

22.

THE SACRIFICE CONTINUES.

1.
With the Baresman brought hither together with the Zaothra,
for the worship of the Creator Ahura Mazda, the resplendent, the
glorious, and for that of the Bountiful Immortals, I desire to
approach this Haoma with my praise, offered (as it is) with punctilious
sanctity (or, for a blessing), and this fresh milk, and this plant
Hadhanaepata. 2. And, as an act of worship to the beneficent waters,
I desire to approach these Zaothras with (my) praise offered (as
they are) with punctilious sanctity, having the Haoma with them,
and the flesh, with the Hadhanaepata. And I desire to approach
the Haoma-water with my praise for the beneficent waters; and
I desire to approach the stone mortar and the iron mortar with
my praise. 3. And I desire to approach this plant for the Baresman
with my praise, and the well-timed prayer for blessings, that
which has approached (to accept our homage), and the memorized
recital and the fulfillment of the good Mazdayasnian Faith, and
the heard recital of the Gathas, and the well-timed and successful
prayer for blessings, that of the holy lord of the ritual order.
And I desire to approach these wood-billets and their perfume
with my praise, - thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! Yea,
I desire to approach all good things with my praise, those which
Mazda made, and which have the seed of sanctity (within them),
(4) for the propitiation of Ahura Mazda and of the Bountiful Immortals,
and of Sraosha the blessed, and of Ahura Mazda's Fire, the lofty
ritual lord!

5-19.
(=Y3.5-19; 20-23=Y3.1-4)

20.
And I desire to approach this Haoma with (my) praise, that
which is thus lifted up with sanctity, and this milk (fresh as
it is, and as if) living and lifted up with sanctity, and this
plant the Hadhanaepata lifted up with sanctity. 21. And I desire
to approach these Zaothras with (my) praise for the beneficial
waters, these Zaothras which have the Haoma with them and the
milk with them, and the Hadhanaepata, and which are lifted up
with sanctity. And I desire to approach the Haoma-water with (my)
praise for the beneficial waters, and the two mortars, the stone
one and the iron one, (22) and I desire to, approach this branch
for the Baresman with my praise, and the memorized recital and
fulfillment of the Mazdayasnian law, and the heard recital of
the Gathas, and the well-timed and persistent prayer for blessings(uttered)
by the holy lords of the ritual order, and this wood and perfume,
even thine, O Fire, Ahura Mazda's son, and all good objects Mazda-made
(23) for the propitiation of Ahura Mazda, the resplendent, the
glorious, and of the Bountiful Immortals, and of Mithra of the
wide pastures, and of Raman Hvastra, (24) and of the resplendent
sun, immortal, radiant, of the fleet horses, and of Vayu, (of
predominant influence and) working on high, set over the other
beings in the creation [(Pazand); that is for thee thus (O Vayu)
when thine influence is that which appertains to Spenta Mainyu],
and for the propitiation of the most just knowledge Mazda-given,
and of the holy and good Religion, the Mazdayasnian Faith; (25)
for the propitiation of the Mathra Spenta, (the bounteous) and
holy, and the effective, instituted against the Daevas, the Zarathushtrian
law, and of the long descent of the good Mazdayasnian Faith [the
holding in mind and devotion to the Mathra Spenta, and knowledge
of the Mazdayasnian Religion] for the propitiation of the understanding
which is innate and Mazda-made, and of that which is heard by
the ear; (26) and for thy propitiation, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's
son! [(Pazand); (yea) thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son]
with all the fires, and for the propitiation of Mount Ushi-darena,
the Mazda-made, radiant with sanctity; (27) and of all the holy
Yazads, spiritual and earthly, and of the holy Fravashis, the
redoubted and overwhelming, those of the ancient lore, and those
of the next of kin and of the Yazad of the spoken name!

23.

THE FRAVASHIS OF THE SAINTS; PRAYERS FOR THEIR APPROACH.

1.
I desire to approach with my praise those Fravashis which
have existed from of old, the Fravashis of the houses, and of
the villages, of the communities, and of the provinces, which
hold the heaven in its place apart, and the water, land, and cattle,
which hold the children in the wombs safely enclosed apart so
that they do not miscarry.

2.
And I desire to approach toward the Fravashi of Ahura Mazda,
and with my praise, and for those of the Bountiful Immortals,
with all the holy Fravashis which are those of the heavenly Yazads.
And I desire to approach the Fravashi of Gaya Maretan
[Gayomard] (the life-man)
in my worship with my praise, and for that of Zarathushtra Spitama,
and for those of Kavi Vishtaspa, and of Isat-vastra, the Zarathushtrian,
with all the holy Fravashis of the other ancient counselors as
well. 3. And I desire in my worship to approach toward every holy
Fravashi whosesoever it may be, and wheresoever dead upon this
earth (its possessor may have lain), the pious woman, or the girl
of tender years, the maiden diligent (among the cattle) in the
field (who) may have dwelt (here; yea, all) which are now worshipped
from this house, which are attentive to, and which attain to (our)
good Yasnas and (our) homage. 4. Yea, I desire to approach the
Fravashis of the saints with my praise redoubted (as they are)
and overwhelming, the Fravashis of those who held to the ancient
lore, and the Fravashis of the next-of-kin; and I desire to approach
toward the Fravashi of mine own soul in my worship with my praise;
and I desire therewith to approach toward all the lords of the
ritual, and with praise; and I desire to approach all the good
Yazads with my praise, the heavenly and the earthly, who are meet
for sacrifice and homage, because of Righteousness the Best!

24.

PRESENTATIONS.

1.
(And having approached these Haomas with our worship), we
present them to Ahura Mazda; (yea, we present) these Haomas, Myazdas,
Zaothras, and the Baresman spread with punctilious sanctity, and
the flesh, and the milk, fresh as if living, and lifted up with
punctilious sanctity, and this branch the Hadhanaepata likewise
lifted up with-sanctity.

2.
(And having approached these Zaothras in our worship), we
present them to the good waters having the Haoma with them, and
the milk, and the Hadhanaepata, and lifted up with scrupulous
sanctity; and (with them) we present the Haoma-water to the good
waters, and both the stone and the iron mortar.

3.
And we present this plant of the Baresman! and the timely
prayer for blessings, which has approached in the due course of
the ritual, and the recollection and practice of the good Mazdayasnian
Religion, and the heard recital of the Gathas, and the timely
prayer for blessings which has approached as the prayer of the
holy lord of the ritual order; and these wood-billets, and the
perfume, (even) thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! and all
good objects Mazda-made, which have the seed of righteousness,
we offer and present. 4. And these we present hereby to Ahura
Mazda, and to Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed (and Righteous),
and to the Bountiful Immortals; and to the Fravashis of the saints,
even to the souls of the saints, and to the Fire of Ahura Mazda,
the lofty lord of entire holy creation, for sacrifice, homage,
propitiation, and for praise.

5.
And these we present hereby to the Fravashi of Zarathushtra
Spitama, the saint, for sacrifice, propitiation, and for praise,
and to that of the people who love Righteousness, with all the
holy Fravashis of the saints who are dead and who are living,
and to those of men who are as yet unborn, and to those of the
prophets who will serve us, and will labor to complete the progress
and renovation of the world.

6.
And we present these Haomas, Myazdas, Zaothras, and the Baresman
spread with sanctity, and the flesh, and the milk (fresh as if)
living, and lifted up with sanctity, and the Hadhanaepata branch.

7.
And we present these Zaothras to the beneficial waters having
the Haoma with them, and the flesh, and the Hadhanaepata lifted
up with sanctity, and the Haoma-water, to the good waters, with
the stone and iron mortars, (8) and this plant of the Baresman,
(and) the tirnely Prayer and the recollection and practice of
the good Mazdayasnian Faith, and these wood-billets, and the perfume,
thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! and all objects which
are Mazda-made, and which have, and are, the seed of Righteousness,
these we offer and present.

9.
(Yea,) we present these hereby to the Bountiful Immortals
who rule aright, and who dispose of all aright, the ever-living,
ever-helpful, who abide with the Good Mind (of the Lord and of
His folk)!

25.

1.
And we worship the Bountiful Immortals with our sacrifice,
who rule aright, and who dispose of all aright; and we worship
this Haoma, this flesh and branch, (2) and these Zaothras for
the good waters, having the Haoma with them, and the flesh with
them, and Hadhanaepata, and lifted up with sanctity, and we worship
the Haoma-water for the beneficial waters; and we worship the
two, the stone mortar and the iron mortar; (3) and we worship
this plant for the Baresman and the well-timed prayer for blessings
which has approached (in its proper place within the ritual course),
and also both the remembrance and the practice of the good Mazdayasnian
Religion, and the heard recital of the Gathas, and the well-timed
prayer for blessings of the holy lord of the ritual order which
has approached, and these wood-billets with the perfume, (even)
thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! and we worship all good
objects which are Mazda-made, and which contain (and are) the
seed of Righteousness.

4.
And we worship Ahura Mazda with our sacrifice, the resplendent,
the glorious, and the Bountiful Immortals who rule aright, and
who dispose (of all) aright, and Mithra of the wide pastures and
Raman Hvastra; and we worship the shining sun, the resplendent,
the immortal, of the fleet horses.

5.
And we worship the holy wind which works on high, placed higher
than the other creatures in the creation; and we worship this
which is thine, O Vayu! and which appertains to the Spenta Mainyu
within thee; and we worship the most true religious Knowledge,
Mazda-made and holy, and the good Mazdayasnian law.

6.
And we worship the Mathra Spenta verily glorious (as it is),
even the law pronounced against the Daevas, the Zarathushtrian
law, and its long descent; yea, we worship the good Mazdayasnian
Religion, and the Mathra which is heart-devoted and bounteous
(imparting heart's devotion to the saint); yea, we worship the
Mazdayasnian Religion maintained in the understanding of the saint;
and we honor that science which is the Mathra Spenta, and the
innate understanding Mazda-made, and the derived understanding,
heard with ear, and Mazda-made.

7.
Yea, we worship thee, the Fire, Ahura Mazda's son I the holy
lord of the ritual order; and we worship all the Fires, and Mount
Ushi-darena (which holds the light) Mazda-made and holy, the Yazad
mount, brilliant with sanctity. 8. And we worship every holy spiritual
Yazad; and every holy earthly Yazad (who exists)!

26.

THE FRAVASHIS; SACRIFICE AND PRAISE TO THEM.

1.
I praise, invoke, and weave my hymn to the good, heroic, and
bountiful Fravashis of the saints; (and having invoked these,
then) we worship the Nmanyas, and the Visyas, and the Zantumas,
and the Dahvyumas, and the Zarathushtrotemas.

2.
And of all these prior Fravashis, we worship here the Fravashi
of Ahura Mazda, which is the greatest and the best, the most beautiful
and the firmest, the most wise and the best in form, and the one
that attains the most its ends because of Righteousness. 3. And
(having invoked them) hither, we worship the good, heroic, bountiful
Fravashis of the holy ones, those of the Bountiful Immortals,
the brilliant, of effective glance, the lofty, the devoted, the
swift ones of the creatures of Ahura who are imperishable and
holy.

4.
And (having invoked them) hither, we worship the spirit and
conscience, the intelligence and soul and Fravashi of those holy
men and women who early heard the lore and commands (of God),
and loved and strove after Righteousness, the ritual truth; and
we worship the soul of the Kine of blessed gift. 5. And (having
invoked it) hither, we worship the Fravashi of Gaya Maretan [Gayomard] the
holy, and the sanctity and Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama the
saint; and we worship the Fravashi of Kavi Vishtasp the holy,
and that of Isat-vastra the Zarathushtrian, the saint.

6.
And (having invoked them) hither, we worship the life, conscience,
intelligence, soul and Fravashi of the next of kin, of the saints
male and female who have striven after the ritual truth, which
are those of the dead and living saints, and which are those also
of men as yet unborn, of the future prophets who will help on
the renovation, and complete the human progress, with them all.

7.
And (having invoked them) hither, we worship the souls of
the dead [(Pazand) which are the Fravashis of the saints]; and
of all the next of kin who have passed away in this house, of
the Aethra-paitis (the teachers) and of the disciples; yea, of
all holy men and women; (8) and we worship the Fravashis of all
the holy teachers and disciples; and of all the saints both male
and female.

9.
(And having invoked them) hither we worship the Fravashis
of all the holy children who fulfill the deeds of piety; and we
worship the Fravashis of the saints within the province; and those
of the saints without the province. 10. We worship the Fravashis
of (those) holy men and holy women; we worship all the good, heroic,
bountiful Fravashis of the saints from Gaya Maretan [Gayomard] (the first
created) to the Saoshyant, the victorious.

11.
Yea, we worship all the Fravashis of the saints, and we worship
the souls of the dead [(Pazand) which are the Fravashis of the
saints]!

27.

PRELUDE TO THE CHIEF RECITAL OF THE AHUNA-VAIRYA.

1.
This is to render Him who is of all the greatest, our lord
and master (even) Ahura Mazda. And this to smite the wicked Angra
Mainyu, and to smite Aeshma of the bloody spear, and the Mazainya
Daevas, and to smite all the wicked Varenya Daevas.

2.
And this is to further Ahura Mazda, the resplendent, the glorious,
to further the Bountiful Immortals, and the influences of the
star Tishtrya, the resplendent, the glorious, (and) to the furtherance
of the holy man, and of all the (bountiful and) holy creatures
of the Bounteous Spirit.

3-5.
(The Ahunwar appears here with Y34.5, the Airyema Ishyo, and
the Ashem Vohu.)

6.
The Haomas are crushed, O Mazda, Khshathra, and Asha, O ye
Lords! Good is Sraosha who accompanies the sacrifice with the
great glory, and may he be present affording strenuous help.

7.
We are offering saving acts of wisdom and of worship with
the sacred gift of the Ahuna-Vairya intoned with sanctity, and
of the two mortars here brought forward with holy act, and with
that of the correctly uttered words likewise; and therefore may
they be to us the more saving in their wise significance.

8-12.
(See Y33.11-14; and Y1.23, and Y12.)

13.
As the Ahu is excellent, so is the Ratu (one who rules) from
(his) sanctity, a creator of mental goodness, and of life's actions
done for Mazda; and the Kingdom (is) for Ahura, which to the poor
may offer a nurturer. 14. (What is Your Kingdom, Your riches;
how may I be Your own in my actions, to nourish Your poor, O Mazda?
Beyond; yea, beyond all we declare You, far from Daevas and Khrafstra-accursed
mortals!)

15.
We worship the Ahuna-vairya. We worship Asha Vahishta, the
most beautiful, the Bountiful Immortal.

AHUNAVAITI GATHA (Y28-34).

Translation by C. Bartholomae, from I.J.S. Taraporewala,
The
Divine Songs of Zarathushtra
.
Notes in square brackets [] were added by JHP.

28.

1.
With outspread hands in petition for that help, O Mazda, I
will pray for the works of the holy spirit, O thou the Right,
whereby I may please the will of Good Thought and the Ox-Soul.

2.
I who would serve you, O Mazda Ahura and Vohu Mano, do ye
give through Asha the blessings of both worlds, the bodily and
that of the Spirit, which set the faithful in felicity.

3.
I who would praise ye as never before, Right and Good Thought
and Mazda Ahura, and those for whom Piety makes an imperishable
Dominion to grow; come ye to me help at my call.

4.
I who have set my heart on watching over the soul, in union
with Good Thought, and as knowing the rewards of Mazda Ahura for
our works, will, while I have power and strength, teach men to
seek after Right.

5.
O Asha, shall I see thee and Good Thought, as one that knows?
(Shall I see) the throne of the mightiest Ahura and the following
of Mazda? Through this word (of promise) on our tongue will we
turn the robber horde unto the Greatest.

6.
Come thou with Good Thought, give through Asha, O Mazda, as
the gift to Zarathushtra, according to thy sure words, long enduring
mighty help, and to us, O Ahura, whereby we may overcome the enmity
of our foes.

7.
Grant, O thou Asha, the reward, the blessing of Good Thought;
O Piety, give our desire to Vishtaspa and to me; O thou Mazda
and King, grant that your Prophet may command a hearing.

8.
The best I ask of Thee, O Best, Ahura (Lord) of one will with
the Best Asha, desiring (it) for the hero Frashaostra and for
those (others) to whom thou wilt give (it), (the best gift) of
Good Mind through all time.

9.
With these bounties, O Ahura, may we never provoke your wrath,
O Mazda and Right and Best Thought, we who have been eager in
bringing you songs of praise. Ye are they that are the mightiest
to advance desire and the Dominion of Blessings.

10.
The wise whom thou knowest as worthy, for their right (doing)
and their good thought, for them do thou fulfill their longing
for attainment. For I know words of prayer are effective with
Ye, which tend to a good object.

11.
I would thereby preserve Right and Good Thought for evermore,
that I may instruct, do thou teach me, O Mazda Ahura, from thy
spirit by thy mouth how it will be with the First Life.

29.

1.
Unto you wailed the Ox-soul, "For whom did ye fashion
me? Who created me? Violence and rapine (and) savagery hath oppressed
me, and outrage and might. I have no other herdsman than you;
prepare for me then the blessings of pasture."

2.
Then the Ox-Creator asked of the Right: "Hast thou a
judge for the Ox, that ye may be able to appoint him zealous tendance
as well as fodder? Whom do ye will to be his lord, who may drive
off violence together with the followers of the Lie?"

3.
To him the Right replied: "There is for the Ox no helper
that can keep him away. Those yonder have no knowledge how right-doers
act towards the lowly".

(The Ox-Creator): "Strongest of beings is he to whose help
I come at call".

4.
(Asha) "Mazda knoweth best the purposes that have been
wrought already by demons and by mortals, and that shall be wrought
hereafter. He, Ahura, is the decider. So shall it be as he shall
will."

5.
(The Ox-Creator) "To Ahura with outspread hands we twain
would pray, my soul and that of the pregnant cow, so that we twain
urge Mazda with entreaties. Destruction is not for the right-living,
nor for the cattle-tender at the hands of Liars."

6.
Then spake Ahura Mazda himself, who knows the law with wisdom:
"There is found no lord or judge according to the Right Order
for the Creator hath formed thee for the cattle-tender and the
farmer."

7.
This ordinance about the fat hath Ahura Mazda, one in will
with Right, created for cattle, and the milk for them that crave
nourishment, by his command, the holy one.

(The Ox and Cow:) "Whom hast thou, O Good Thought, among
men, who may care for us twain?"

8.
(Vohu Manah:) He is known to me here who alone hath heard
our commands, even Zarathushtra Spitama; he willeth to make known
our thoughts, O Mazda, and those of the Right. So let us bestow
on him charm of speech.

9.
Then the Ox-Soul lamented: "That I must be content with
the ineffectual word of an impotent man for my protector, when
I wish for one that commands mightily! When ever shall there be
one who shall give him (the Ox) effective help?"

10.
(Zarathushtra:) Do ye, O Ahura, grant them strength, and O
Asha, and O Good Thought, that dominion, whereby he (the Savior)
could produce good dwellings and peace. I also have realized thee,
Mazda, as the first to accomplish this.

11.
"Where are Right and Good Thought and Dominion? So, ye
men, acknowledge me, for instruction, Mazda, for the great society."

(The Ox and Cow:) "O Ahura, now is help ours, we will be
ready to serve those that are of you."

30.

1.
Now I will proclaim to those who will hear the things that
the understanding man should remember, for hymns unto Ahura and
prayers to Good Thought; also the felicity that is with the heavenly
lights, which through Right shall be beheld by him who wisely
thinks.

2.
Hear with your ears the best things; look upon them with clear-seeing
thought, for decision between the two Beliefs, each man for himself
before the Great consummation, bethinking you that it be accomplished
to our pleasure.

3.
Now the two primal Spirits, who reveal themselves in vision
as Twins, are the Better and the Bad, in thought and word and
action. And between these two the wise ones chose aright, the
foolish not so.

4.
And when these twain Spirits came together in the beginning,
they created Life and Not-Life, and that at the last Worst Existence
shall be to the followers of the Lie, but the Best Existence to
him that follows Right.

5.
Of these twain Spirits he that followed the Lie chose doing
the worst things; the holiest Spirit chose Right, he that clothes
him with the massy heavens as a garment. So likewise they that
are fain to please Ahura Mazda by dutiful actions.

6.
Between these twain the Daevas also chose not aright, for
infatuation came upon them as they took counsel together, so that
they chose the Worst Thought. Then they rushed together to Violence,
that they might enfeeble the world of men.

7.
And to him (i.e. mankind) came Dominion, and Good Mind, and
Right and Piety gave continued life to their bodies and indestructibility,
so that by thy retributions through (molten) metal he may gain
the prize over the others.

8.
So when there cometh their punishment for their sins, then,
O Mazda, at Thy command shall Good Thought establish the Dominion
in the Consummation, for those who deliver the Lie, O Ahura, into
the hands of Right.

9.
So may we be those that make this world advance, O Mazda and
ye other Ahuras, come hither, vouchsafing (to us) admission into
your company and Asha, in order that (our) thought may gather
together while reason is still shaky.

10.
Then truly on the (world of) Lie shall come the destruction
of delight; but they who get themselves good name shall be partakers
in the promised reward in the fair abode of Good Thought, of Mazda,
and of Right.

11.
If, O ye mortals, ye mark those commandments which Mazda hath
ordained — of happiness and pain, the long punishment for the
follower of the Druj, and blessings for the followers of the Right
-- then hereafter shall it be well.

31.

1.
Mindful of your commands, we proclaim words unpleasant for
them to hear that after the commands of the Lie destroy the creatures
of Right, but most welcome to those that give their heart to Mazda.

2.
If by reason of these things the better path is not in sight
for choosing, then will I come to you all as judge of the parties
twain whom Ahura Mazda knoweth, that we may live according to
the Right.

3.
What award Thou givest through the (holy) Spirit and through
the Fire and hast taught through Asha, to both the parties, and
what the decision is for the wise, this do Thou tell us, Mazda,
that we may know, even with the tongue of Thine own mouth, that
I may convert all living men.

4.
If Asha is to be invoked and Mazda and the other Ahuras and
Ashi and Armaiti, do thou seek for me, O Vohu Manah,
the mighty
Dominion, by the increase of which we might vanquish the Lie.

1. Boyce: "seek by the best purpose (vahishta manah)..."
This is an excellent example of the continuous juxtaposition in the Gathas
of the Amesha Spentas as divinities and things.]

5.
Tell me therefore what ye, O thou Right, have appointed me
as the better portion, for me to determine, to know and to keep
in mind, O thou Good Thought — which portion they envy me. Tell
me of all these things. O Mazda Ahura, that shall not or shall
be.

6.
To him shall the best befall, who, as one that knows, speaks
to me Right's truthful word of Welfare and of Immortality; even
the Dominion of Mazda which Good Thought shall increase for him.

7.
About which he in the beginning thus thought, "let the
blessed realms be filled with Light", he it is that by his
wisdom created Right. (Those realms) that the Best Thought shall
possess those dost Thou exalt, O Mazda, through the Spirit, which,
O Ahura, is ever the same.

8.
I recognize Thee, O Mazda, in my thought, that Thou the First
art (also) the Last — that Thou art Father of Vohu Manah; --
when I apprehend Thee with mine eye, that Thou art the true Creator
of Right [Asha], and art the Lord to judge the actions of life.

9.
Thine was Armaiti, Thine the Ox-Creator, (namely) the Wisdom
of the Spirit, O Mazda Ahura, because Thou didst give (the cattle)
choice whether to depend on a husbandman or one who is no husbandman.

10.
So she chose for herself out of the two the cattle-tending
husbandman as her lord to guard the Right, the man that advances
Good Thought. He that is no-husbandman, O Mazda, however eager
he be, has no part in this good message.

11.
When Thou, O Mazda, in the beginning didst create the Individual
and the Individuality, through Thy Spirit, and powers of understanding
- when Thou didst make life clothed with the body, when (Thou
madest) actions and teachings, whereby one may exercise one's
convictions at one's free-will;

12.
Then lifts up his voice the false speaker or the true speaker,
he that knows or he that knows not, (each) according to his own
heart and mind. Passing from one to another Armaiti confers with
the spirit in whom there is wavering.

13.
Whatever open or whatever secret (acts) may be visited with
punishment, or whether a person for a little sin demands the highest
punishment, — of all this through Asha Thou art aware, observing
it with Thy flashing eye.

14.
These things I ask Thee, O Ahura, how will these come and
happen — the dues, that in accord with the records are appointed
for the righteous, and those, O Mazda, for the followers of the
Druj, — how shall these be when they come to the reckoning.

15.
This I ask, what penalty is for him who seeks to achieve kingdom
for a liar, for a man of ill deeds, O Ahura, who finds not his
living without injury to the husbandman's cattle and men, though
he does him no injury.

16.
This I ask, whether the understanding man, who strives to
advance the Dominion over the house, or district, or land through
Asha, shall become like Thee, O Mazda Ahura, when will he be and
how will he act?

17.
Which is the greater — what the follower of Asha or what
the follower of Druj believe? Let him that knows inform the wise;
no longer let him that knows nothing deceive. Be to us, O Mazda
Ahura, the Teacher of Good Thought.

18.
Let none of you listen to the words and commands of the follower
of the Druj; for he brings house and clan and district and land
into misery and destruction. Resist them with weapon!

19.
To him should we listen who has understood Asha, to the wise
Healer of Life O Ahura, who can or will establish the truth of
the words of his tongue, when through Thy red Fire, O Mazda, the
assignment (of rewards) is made to the two parties.

20.
Whosoever cometh over to the Righteous, far from him hereafter
shall be long age of misery (and) darkness, ill-food, and crying
of woe. To such an existence, ye followers of the Lie, shall your
own Self bring you through your (own) action.

21.
Mazda Ahura by virtue of His absolute Lordship will grant
a perpetuity of communion with Haurvatat and Ameretat, and with
Asha, with Khshathra, and with Vohu Manah, to him that in spirit
and in action is his friend.

22.
Clear it is to the man of understanding, as one who has realized
it with his thought. He upholds Asha together with good Dominion
by his word and deed. He will be, O Mazda Ahura, the most helpful
helper to Thee.

32.

1.
(Zarathushtra) — And his blessedness, even that of Ahura
Mazda, shall the nobles strive to attain, his the community with
the brotherhood, his, ye Daevas, in the manner as I declare it.

(The Representatives of the Classes) — As thy messengers we would
keep them far away that are enemies to you.

2.
To them Mazda Ahura, who is united with Good Thought, and
is in goodly fellowship with glorious Right, through Dominion,
made reply: We make choice of your holy good Piety [Armaiti] — may it be
ours.

3.
(Zarathushtra) — But ye, ye Daevas all, and he that highly
honors you, are the seed of Bad Thought — yes, and of the Lie
and of Arrogance, likewise your deeds, whereby ye have long been
known in the seventh region of the earth.

4.
For ye have brought it to pass that men who do the worst things
shall be called beloved of the Daevas, separating themselves from
Good Thought, departing from the will of Mazda Ahura and from
Right.

5.
Thereby ye defrauded mankind of happy life and immortality,
by the deed which he and the Bad Spirit together with Bad Thought
and Bad Word taught you, ye Daevas and the Liars, so as to ruin
(mankind).

6.
The many sins by which he has succeeded in being famous whether
by these it shall be thus, this Thou Knowest by the Best Thought,
O Ahura, Thou who art mindful of each person's deserts. In Thy
Dominion, O Mazda, and that of Asha, shall your decision thereon
be observed.

7.
None of these sins will the understanding commit, in eagerness
to attain the blessing that shall be proclaimed, we know, through
the glowing metal — sins the issue of which, O Ahura Mazda, Thou
knowest best.

8.
Among these sinners, we know, Yima was included, Vivanghen's
son, who desiring to satisfy men gave our people flesh of the
ox to eat. From these shall I be separated by Thee, O Mazda, at
last.

9.
The teacher of evil destroys the lore, he by his teaching
destroys the design of life, he prevents the possession of Good
Thought from being prized. These words of my spirit I wail unto
you, O Mazda, and to the Right.

10.
He it is that destroys, who declares that the Ox and the Sun
are the worst things to behold with the eyes, and hath made the
pious into liars, and desolates the pastures and lifts his weapon
against the righteous man.

11.
It is they, the liars, who destroy life, who are mightily
determined to deprive matron and master of the enjoyment of their
heritage, in that they would prevent the righteous, O Mazda, from
the Best Thought.

12.
Since they by their lore would pervert men from the best doing,
Mazda uttered evil against them, who destroy the life of the Ox
with shouts of joy, by whom Grehma and his tribe are preferred
to the Right and the Karapan and the lordship of them that seek
after the Lie.

13.
Since Grehma shall attain the realm in the dwelling of the
Worst Thought, he and the destroyers of life, O Mazda, they shall
lament in their longing for the message of Thy prophet, who will
stay them from beholding the Right.

14.
To his undoing Grehma, and the Kavis, have long devoted their
purpose and energies, for they set themselves to help the liar,
and that it may be said, "The Ox shall be slain that it may
kindle the Averter of Death to help us."

15.
Thereby hath come to ruin the Karapan and the Kavi community,
through those whom they will not have to rule over their life.
These shall be born away from them both to the dwelling of Good
Thought.

16.
..., who hast power, O Mazda Ahura, on him who threatens to
be my undoing, that I may fetter the men of the Lie in their violence
against my friends.

33.

1.
According as it is with the laws that belong to the present
life, so shall the Judge act with most just deed towards the man
of the Lie and the man of the Right, and him whose false things
and good things balance (in equal measure).

2.
Whoso worketh ill for the liar by word or thought or hands,
or converts his dependent to the good — such men meet the will
of Ahura Mazda to his satisfaction.

3.
Whose is most good to the righteous man, be he noble or member
of the community or the brotherhood, Ahura — or with diligence
cares for the cattle, he shall be hereafter in the pasture of
Right and Good Thought [Asha and Vohu Manah].

4.
I who by worship would keep far from Thee, O Mazda, disobedience
and Bad Thought, heresy from the nobles, and from the community
the Lie, that is most near, and from the brotherhood the slanderers,
and the worst herdsmen from the pastures of the cattle; --

5.
I who would invoke thy Obedience as the greatest of all at
the Consummation, attaining long life, and the Dominion of Good
Thought, and the straight ways into Right, wherein Mazda Ahura
dwells.

6.
I, as a priest, who would learn the straight (paths) by the
Right, would learn by the Best Spirit how to practice husbandry
by that thought in which it is thought of; these Twain of Thine,
O Ahura Mazda, I strive to see and take counsel with them.

7.
Come hither to me, O ye Best Ones, hither, O Mazda, in Thine
own person and visibly, O Right and Good Thought, that I may be
heard beyond the limits of the people. Let the august duties be
manifest among us and clearly viewed.

8.
Consider ye my matters whereon I am active, O Good Thought,
my worship, O Mazda, towards one like you, and O Right, the words
of my praise. Grant, O Welfare and Immortality, your own everlasting
blessing.

9.
That Spirit of Thine, Mazda, together with the comfort of
the Comrades Twain, who advance the Right, let the Best Thought
bring through the Reform wrought by me. Sure is the support of
those twain, whose souls are one.

10.
All the pleasures of life which thou holdest, those that were,
that are, and that shall be O Mazda, according to thy good will
apportion them. Through Good Thought advance thou the body, through
Dominion and Right at will.

11.
The most mighty Ahura Mazda, and Piety, and Right that blesses
our substance, and Good Thought and Dominion, hearken unto me,
be merciful to me, when to each man the recompense comes.

12.
Rise up for me, O Ahura, through Armaiti give strength, through
the holiest Spirit give might, O Mazda, through the good Recompense
[
âdâ
, offering],
through the Right give powerful prowess, through Good Thought
give the reward.

13.
To support me, O Thou that seest far onward, do ye assure
me the incomparable things in your Dominion, O Ahura, as the Destiny
of Good Thought. O Holy Armaiti, teach the Daenas about the Right.

14.
As an offering Zarathushtra brings the life of his own body,
the choiceness of good thought, action, and speech, unto Mazda,
unto the Right, Obedience, and Dominion.

34.

1.
The action, the word, and the worship for which Thou, O Mazda,
shalt bestow Immortality and Right, and Dominion of Welfare -
through multitudes of these, O Ahura, we would that thou shouldst
give them.

2.
And all the actions of the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] and the holy man, whose
soul follows the Right, do ye set with the thought (thereof) in
thine outer court, O Mazda, when ye are adored with hymns of praise.

3.
To Thee and to Right [Asha] we will offer the sacrifice [myazda,
i.e. offering] with due service [veneration], that in (Thy established)
Dominion ye may bring all creatures to perfection through Good Thought.
For the reward of the wise man is for ever secure, O Mazda, among you.

4.
Of Thy Fire, O Ahura, that is mighty through Right, promised
and powerful, we desire that it may be for the faithful man with
manifested delight, but for the enemy with visible torment, according
to the pointings of the hand.

5.
Have ye Dominion and power, O Mazda, Right and Good Thought,
to do as I urge upon you, even to protect your poor man? We have
renounced the robber-gangs, both demons and men.

6.
If ye are truly thus, O Mazda, Right and Good Thought, then
give me this token, even a total reversal of this life, that I
may come before you again more joyfully with worship and praise.

7.
Can they be true to thee, O Mazda, who by their doctrines
turn the known inheritances of Good Thought into misery and woe
[usheuru?]. I know none other but you, O Right, so do ye protect
us.

8.
For by these actions they put us in fear, in which peril is
for many — in that the stronger (puts in fear) (me) the weaker
one — through hatred of thy commandment, O Mazda. They that will
not have the Right in their thought, from them shall the Good
Abode be far.

9.
These men of evil action who spurn the holy Piety, precious
to thy wise one, O Mazda, through their having no part in Good
Thought, from them Right shrinks back far, as from us shrink the
wild beasts of prey.

10.
The man of understanding [or good will] has instructed (people) to cling
to action of this Good Thought [Vohu Manah], and to the Holy Piety
[Spenta Armaiti], creator, comrade of Right [Asha] — wise that he is,
and to all hope, O Ahura,
that are in thy Dominion, O Mazda.

11.
And both thy (gifts) shall be for sustenance, even nectar
and ambrosia. Piety linked with Right shall advance the Dominion
of Good Thought, its permanence and power. By these, O Mazda,
dost thou bless the foes of thy foes.

12.
What is thine ordinance? What willst thou? What of praise
or what of worship? Proclaim it, Mazda, that we may hear what
ordinances Destiny will apportion. Teach us by Right the paths
of Good Thought that are blessed to go in, -

13.
Even that way of Good Thought, O Ahura, of which thou didst
speak to me, whereon, a way well made by Right, the Daena of the
future benefactors shall pass to the reward that was prepared
for the wise, of which thou art determinant, O Mazda.

14.
The precious reward, then, O Mazda, ye will give by the action
of Good Thought to the bodily life of those who are in the community
that tends the pregnant cow, (the promise of) your good doctrine,
Ahura, that of the wisdom which exalts communities through Right.

15.
O Mazda, make known to me the best teachings and actions, these
O Good Thought and O Right the due of praise. Through your Dominion,
O Ahura, assure us that mankind shall be capable according to
(Thy) will.

YASNA HAPTANGHAITI.

35.

(Translated by L. H. Mills, from
,
American Edition, 1898.)

PRAISE TO AHURA AND THE IMMORTALS; PRAYER FOR THE PRACTICE
AND DIFFUSION OF THE FAITH.

1.
We sacrifice to Ahura Mazda, the holy Lord of the ritual order,
and to the Bountiful Immortals, who rule aright, who dispose of
all aright; and we sacrifice to the entire creation of the clean,
the spiritual and the mundane, with the longing blessing of the
beneficent ritual, with the longing blessing of the benignant
Religion, the Mazdayasnian Faith.

2.
We are praisers of good thoughts, of good words, and of good
actions, of those now and those hereafter [(Pazand) of those being
done; and of those completed]. We implant (?) them (with our homage,
and we do this) the more, and yet the more since we are (praisers)
of the good (from whom they spring).

3.
That, therefore, would we choose, O Ahura Mazda! and thou,
O Righteousness the beauteous! that we should think, and speak,
and do those thoughts, and words, and deeds, among actual good
thoughts, and words, and actions, which are the best for both
the worlds; (4) and together with these gifts (?) and actions
which are thus the best, we would pray for the Kine (which represents
the pure creation), that she may have comfort and have fodder
from the famed! and from the humble, from the potent and the weak.

5.
To the best of good rulers (is) verily the Kingdom, because
we render and ascribe it to Him, and make it thoroughly His own
(?), to Mazda Ahura do we ascribe it, and to Righteousness the
Best.

6.
As thus both man or woman knows (the duty), both thoroughly
and truly, so let him, or her, declare it and fulfill it, and
inculcate it upon those who may perform it as it is. 7. We would
be deeply mindful of Your sacrifice and homage, Yours, O Ahura
Mazda! and the best, (and we would be mindful) of the nurture
of the Kine. And that let us inculcate, and perform for You according
as we may; and (for) such (praisers as we are).

8.
Under the shelter of the ritual Order let us do so in the
active fulfillment of its (precepts) toward every one of the (clean)
and better creatures which are fit to live, with a gift for both
the worlds.

9.
Yea, those words and sayings, O Ahura Mazda! we would proclaim
as Righteousness, and as of the better mind (?); and we would
make Thee the one who both supports (us in our proclamation) of
them, and who throws still further light upon them (as they are),

10.
And by reason of Thy Righteous Order, Thy Good Mind, and Thy
Sovereign Power, and through the instrumentality of our praises
of Thee, O Ahura Mazda! and for the purpose of (still further)
praises, by Thy spoken words, and for (still further) spoken words,
through Thy Yasna, and for (still further) Yasnas (would we thus
proclaim them, and make Thee the bestower of our light).

36.

TO AHURA AND THE FIRE.

1.
We would approach You two, O (Ye) primeval ones in the house
of this Thy holy Fire, O Ahura Mazda, Thou most bounteous Spirit!
Who brings pollutions to this (Thy flame) him wilt Thou cover
with pollutions (in his turn). 2. But as the most friendly do
Thou give us zeal, O Fire of the Lord! and approach us, and with
the loving blessing of the most friendly, with the praise of the
most adored. Yea, may'st thou approach to aid us in this our greatest
(undertaking) among the efforts of our zeal.

3.
The Fire of Ahura Mazda art thou verily; yea, the most bounteous
one of His Spirit, wherefore Thine is the most potent of all names
(for grace), O Fire of the Lord! 4. And therefore we would approach
Thee, (O Ahura!) with the help of Thy Good Mind (which Thou dost
implant within us), with Thy (good) Righteousness, and with the
actions and the words inculcated by Thy good wisdom!

5.
We therefore bow before Thee, and we direct our prayers to
Thee with confessions of our guilt, O Ahura Mazda! with all the
good thoughts (which Thou dost inspire), with all the words well
said, and the deeds well done, with these would we approach Thee.
6. And to Thy most beauteous body do we make our deep acknowledgments,
O Ahura Mazda! to those stars (which are Thy body); and to that
one, the highest of the high, [such as the sun was called]!

37.

TO AHURA, THE HOLY CREATION, THE FRAVASHIS OF THE JUST, AND
THE BOUNTIFUL IMMORTALS.

1.
Thus therefore do we worship Ahura Mazda, who made the Kine
(the living creation), and the (embodied) Righteousness (which
is incarnate in the clean), and the waters, and the wholesome
plants, the stars, and the earth, and all (existing) objects that
are good. 2. Yea, we worship Him for His Sovereign Power and His
greatness, beneficent (as they are), and with priority among the
Yazads who abide beside the Kine (and care for her protection
and support).

3.
And we worship Him under His name as Lord, to Mazda dear,
the most beneficent (of names). We worship him with our bones,
and with our flesh, (with our bodies and our life). And we worship
the Fravashis of the saints, of holy men, and holy women; (4)
and Righteousness the Best do we worship, the most beauteous,
the Bountiful Immortal and that which is endowed with light in
all things good.

5.
And we worship the Good Mind (of the Lord), and His Sovereign
Power, and the Good Faith, the good law of our thrift, and Piety
the ready mind (within Thy folk)!

38.

TO THE EARTH AND THE SACRED WATERS.

1.
And now we worship this earth which bears us, together with
Thy wives, O Ahura Mazda! yea, those Thy wives do we worship which
are so desired from their sanctity. 2. We sacrifice to their zealous
wishes, and their capabilities, their inquiries (as to duty),
and their wise acts of pious reverence, and with these their blessedness,
their full vigor and good portions, their good fame and ample
wealth. 3. O ye waters! now we worship you, you that are showered
down, and you that stand in pools and vats, and you that bear
forth. (our loaded vessels?) ye female Ahuras of Ahura, you that
serve us (all) in helpful ways, well forded and full-flowing,
and effective for the bathings, we will seek you and for both
the worlds! 4. Therefore did Ahura Mazda give you names, O ye
beneficent ones! when He who made the good bestowed you. And by
these names we worship you, and by them we would ingratiate ourselves
with you, and with them would we bow before you, and direct our
prayers to you with free confessions of our debt. O waters, ye
who are productive, and ye maternal ones, ye with heat that suckles
the (frail and) needy (before birth), ye waters (that have once
been) rulers of (us) all, we will now address you as the best,
and the most beautiful; those (are) yours, those good (objects)
of our offerings, ye long of arm to reach our sickness, or misfortune,
ye mothers of our life!

39.

TO THE SOUL OF THE KINE, &C.

1.
And now we sacrifice to the Kine's soul, and to her created
body, and we sacrifice to the souls of cattle who are fit to live
(for us), and whose (we?) are, such as are the same to them.

2.
And we worship the souls of those beasts which are tame and
broken in, and of wild herds, and the souls of the saints wherever
they were born, both of men and of women, whose good consciences
are conquering in the strife against the Daevas, or will conquer,
or have conquered.

3.
And now we worship the Bountiful Immortals (all) the good,
and both those male, and those female (by their names). The males
among them do we worship, ever living, and ever helpful, who dwell
beside the pious, and the females thus the same. 4. As Thou, O
Ahura Mazda! hast thought and spoken, as thou hast determined,
and hast done these things (effecting) what is good, therefore
do we offer to Thee, therefore do we ascribe to Thee our praises,
and worship Thee, and bow ourselves before Thee; and therefore
would we direct our prayers to Thee, Ahura! with confessions of
our sin.

5.
And we thus draw near to Thee together with the good kinship
of our kindred, with that of Righteousness the blessed, and the
good law of thrift and energy and the good Piety, the ready mind
(within Thy folk)!

40.

PRAYERS FOR HELPERS.

1.
And now in these Thy dispensations, O Ahura Mazda! do Thou
wisely act for us, and with abundance with Thy bounty and Thy
tenderness as touching us; and grant that reward which Thou hast
appointed to our souls, O Ahura Mazda! 2. Of this do Thou Thyself
bestow upon us for this world and the spiritual; and now as part
thereof (do Thou grant) that we may attain to fellowship with
Thee, and Thy Righteousness for all duration.

3.
And do Thou grant us, O Ahura! men who are righteous, and
both lovers and producers of the Right as well. And give us trained
beasts for the pastures, broken in for riding, and for bearing,
(that they may be) in helpful companionship with us, and as a
source of long enduring vigor, and a means of rejoicing grace
to us for this.

4.
So let there be a kinsman lord for us, with the laborers of
the village, and so likewise let there be the clients (or the
peers). And by the help of those may we arise.

So may we be to You, O Mazda Ahura! holy and true, and with free
giving of our gifts.

41.

A PRAYER TO AHURA AS THE KING, THE LIFE, AND THE REWARDER.

1.
Praises, and songs, and adorations do we offer to Ahura Mazda,
and to Righteousness the Best; yea, we offer and we ascribe them,
and proclaim them. 2. And to Thy good Kingdom, O Ahura Mazda!
may we attain for ever, and a good King be Thou over us; and let
each man of us, and so each woman, thus abide, O Thou most beneficent
of beings, and for both the worlds! 3. Thus do we render Thee.
the helpful Yazad, endowed with good devices, the friend of them
(who worship Thee) with (well-adjusted) ritual; so may'st Thou
be to us our life, and our body's vigor, O Thou most beneficent
of beings, and that for both the worlds!

4.
Aye, let us win and conquer (?) long life, O Ahura Mazda!
in Thy grace, and through Thy will may we be powerful. May'st
Thou lay hold on us to help, and long, and with salvation, O Thou
most beneficent of beings!

5.
Thy praisers and Mathra-speakers may we be called, O Ahura
Mazda! so do we wish, and to this may we attain. What reward most
meet for our deserving Thou hast appointed for the souls, O Ahura
Mazda! (6) of that do Thou bestow on us for this life, and for
that of mind. Of that reward (do Thou Thyself grant this advantage),
that we may come under Thy protecting guardianship, and that of
Righteousness for ever. We sacrifice to that brave Yasna, the
Yasna Haptanghaiti, the holy, the ritual chief!

42.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE HAPTANGHAITI.

1.
We worship You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! the entire collection
of this Yasna, Haptanghaiti (as we sum up all). And we sacrifice
to the fountains of the waters, and to the fordings of the rivers,
to the forkings of the highways, and to the meetings of the roads.

2.
And we sacrifice to the hills that run with torrents, and
the lakes that brim with waters! and to the corn that fills the
corn-fields; and we sacrifice to both the protector and the Creator,
to both Zarathushtra and the Lord.

3.
And we sacrifice to both earth and heaven, and to the stormy
wind that Mazda made, and to the peak of high Haraiti, and to
the land, and all things good.

4.
And we worship the Good Mind (in the living) and the spirits
of the saints. And we sacrifice to the fish of fifty-fins, and
to that sacred beast the Unicorn (?) which stands in Vouru-kasha,
and we sacrifice to that sea of Vouru-kasha where he stands, (5)
and to the Haoma, golden-flowered, growing on the heights; yea,
to the Haoma that restores us, and aids this world's advance.
We sacrifice to Haoma that driveth death afar, (6) and to the
flood-streams of the waters, and to the great flights of the birds,
and to the approaches of the Fire-priests, as they approach us
from afar, and seek to gain the provinces, and spread the ritual
lore. And we sacrifice to the Bountiful Immortals all!

Ushtavaiti Gatha

Translation by Bartholomae, from I.J.S. Taraporewala,
The
Divine Songs of Zarathushtra
.
Notes in square brackets [] were added by JHP.

43.

1.
To each several man, to whom Mazda Ahura ruling at his will
grant after the (petitioner's) will, I will after his will that
he attain permanence and power, lay hold of Right - grant this,
O Piety, - the destined gift of wealth, the life of the Good Thought,

2.
and it shall be for him the best of all things. After his
longing for bliss may one be given bliss, through the provident
most holy spirit, O Mazda, even the blessings of Good Thought
which thou wilt give through Right all the days with joy of enduring
life.

3.
May he attain to that which is better than the good, who would
teach us the straight paths of blessedness in this life here of
the body and in that of thought - true paths that lead to the
world where Ahura Mazda dwells - a faithful man, well-knowing
and holy like thee, O Mazda.

4.
Then shall I recognize thee as strong and holy, O Mazda, when
by the hand in which thou thyself dost hold the destinies that
thou wilt assign to the Liar and the Righteous, by the glow of
thy Fire whose power is Right, the might of Good Thought shall
come to me.

5.
As the holy one [spenta] I recognize thee, Mazda Ahura, when I saw
thee in the beginning at the birth of Life, when thou madest actions
and words to have their meed — evil for the evil, a good destiny
for the good — through thy wisdom when creation shall reach its
goal.

6.
At which goal thou wilt come with thy holy Spirit, O Mazda,
with Dominion, at the same with Good Thought, by whose action
the settlements will prosper through Right. Their judgments shall
Piety proclaim, even those of thy wisdom which none can deceive.

7.
As the holy one I recognized thee, Mazda Ahura, when Good
Thought came to me and asked me: "Who art thou? to whom dost
thou belong? By what signs wilt thou appoint the days for questioning
about thy possessions and thyself?"

8.
Then I said to him: "To the first (question), Zarathushtra
am I, a true foe to the Liar, to the utmost of my power, but a
powerful support would I be to the Righteous, that I may attain
the future things of the infinite Dominion, according as I praise
and sing thee, O Mazda.

9.
As the holy one I recognize thee, Mazda Ahura, when Good Thought
came to me. To his question, "For which wilt thou decide"
(I made reply). "At the gift of adoration to thy Fire, I
will bethink me of Right so long as I have power.

10.
Then show me Right, upon whom I call.

(Mazda:) "Associating him with Piety, I have come hither.
Ask us now what things are here for thee to ask. For thy asking
is as that of a mighty one, since he that is able should make
thee as a mighty one possessed of thy desire."

11.
As the holy one I recognized thee, Mazda Ahura, when Good
Thought came to me, when first by your words I was instructed.
Shall it bring me sorrow among men, my devotion, in doing that
which ye tell me is the best.

12.
And when thou saidest to me, 'To Right shalt thou go for teaching',
then thou didst not command what I did not obey: 'Speed thee,
ere my Obedience come, followed by treasure-laden Destiny, who
shall render to men severally the destiny of the two-fold award.'

13.
As the holy one I recognized thee, Mazda Ahura, when Good
Thought came to me to learn the state of my desire. Grant it me,
that which none may compel you to allow, (the wish) for long continuance
of blessed existence that they say is in thy Dominion.

14.
If thy provident side, such as an understanding man who has
the power would give to his friends, comes to me by the Dominion
through Right, then I will bestir myself to set myself in opposition
against the foes of thy Law, together with all those who are mindful
of thy words.

15.
As the holy one I recognized thee, Mazda Ahura, when Good
Thought came to me, when the best Tushna-Matay taught me to declare:
"Let not men seek again and again to please the Liars, for
they make all the righteous enemies."

16.
And Zarathushtra himself, O Ahura, chooses each one of thy
holiest Spirit, O Mazda. May Right be embodied full of life and
strength! May Piety abide in the Dominion bright as the sun! May
Good Thought give destiny to men according to their works!

44.

1.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - as to prayer, how
it should be to one of you. O Mazda Ahura, might one like thee
teach to a friend such as I am, and through friendly Right give
us support, that Good Thought may come to us.

2.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether at the beginning
of the Best Existence the recompenses shall bring blessedness
to him that meets with them. Surely he, O Right, the holy one,
who watches in his spirit the transgression of all, if himself
the benefactor of all that lives, O Mazda.

3.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. Who is by generation
the Father of Right, at the first? Who determined the path of
sun and stars? Who is it by whom the moon waxes and wanes again?
This, O Mazda, and yet more, I am fain to know.

4.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. Who upholds the earth
beneath and the firmament from falling? Who the waters and the
plants? Who yoked swiftness to winds and clouds? Who is, O Mazda,
creator of Good Thought?

5.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. What artist made light
and darkness? What artist made sleep and waking? Who made morning,
noon, and night, that call the understanding man to his duty?

6.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether what I proclaim
is verily the truth. Will Right with its actions give aid (at
the last)? will Piety? Will Good Thought announce from the Dominion?
For whom hast thou made the pregnant cow that brings good luck?

7.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. Who created together
with Dominion the precious Piety? Who made by wisdom the son obedient
to his father? I strive to recognize by these things thee, O Mazda,
creator of all things through the holy spirit.

8.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. I could keep in mind
thy design, O Mazda, and understand aright the maxims of life
which I ask of Good Thought and Right. How will my soul partake
of the good that gives increase?

9.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether for the Self
that I would bring to perfection, that of the man of insight,
the Lord of Dominion would make promises of the sure Dominion,
one of thy likenesses, O Mazda, who dwells in one abode with (Right)
and Good Thought.

10.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. The Religion which
is best for (all) that are, which in union with Right should prosper
all that is mine, will they duly observe it, the religion of my
creed, with words and action of Piety, in desire for thy (future)
good things, O Mazda?

11.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether Piety will
extend to those to whom thy Religion shall be proclaimed? I was
ordained at the first for this by thee; all others I look upon
with hatred of spirit.

12.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. Who among those with
whom I would speak is a righteous man, and who a liar? On which
side is the enemy? (On this), or is he the enemy, the Liar who
opposes thy blessings? How shall it be with him? Is he not to
be thought of as an enemy?

13.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether we shall drive
the Lie away from us to those who being full of disobedience will
not strive after fellowship with Right, nor trouble themselves
with counsel of Good Thought.

14.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether I would put
the Lie into the hands of Right, to cast her down by the words
of thy lore, to work a mighty destruction among the Liars, to
bring torments upon them and enmities, O Mazda.

15.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - if thou hast power
over this to ward off from me through Right, when the two opposing
hosts meet in battle according to those decrees which thou wilt
firmly establish. Whether is it of the twain that thou wilt give
victory.

16.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. Who is victorious to
protect by thy doctrine (all) that are? By vision assure me how
to set up the judge that heals the world. Then let him have Obedience
coming with Good Thought unto every man whom thou desirest, O
Mazda.

17.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether through you
I shall attain my goal, O Mazda, even attachment unto you, and
that my voice may be effectual, that Welfare and Immortality may
be ready to unite according to that promise with him who joins
himself with Right.

18.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura - whether I shall indeed,
O Right, earn the reward, even ten mares with a stallion and a
camel, which was promised to me, O Mazda, as well as through thee,
the future gift of Welfare and Immortality.

19.
This I ask Thee, tell me truly, Ahura. He that will not give
the reward to him that earns it, even to the man who fulfilling
his word gives him (what he undertook) - what penalty shall come
to him for the same at the present? I know that which shall come
to him at the last.

20.
Have the Daevas ever exercised good dominion? And I ask of
those who see how for the Daevas' sake the Karapan and the Usij
give cattle to violence, and how the Kavi made them continually
to mourn, instead of taking care that they make the pastures prosper
through Right.

45.

1.
I will speak forth: hear now and hearken now, ye from near
and ye from far that desire (instruction). Now observe this in
your mind, all of you, for he is revealed. Never shall the false
Teacher destroy the Second Life, the Liar, in perversion by his
tongue into evil belief.

2.
I will speak of the Spirits twain at the first beginning of
the world, of whom the holier spoke thus to the enemy: "Neither
thought, nor teachings, nor wills, nor beliefs, nor words, nor
deeds, nor selfs, nor souls of us twain agree".

3.
I will speak of that which Mazda Ahura, the all-knowing, revealed
to me first in this (earthly) life. Those of you that put not
in practice this word as I think and utter it, to them shall be
woe at the end of life.

4.
I will speak of what is best for the life. Through Asha I
have come to know, O Mazda, who created it (the life), the father
of active Good Thought: but his daughter is the good-working Armaiti.
The all-observant Ahura is not to be deceived.

5.
I will speak of that which (he), the Holiest declared to me
as the word that is best for mortals to obey; while he said: "they
who for my sake render him obedience, shall all attain unto Welfare
and Immortality by the actions of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP]" - (he)
Mazda Ahura.

6.
I will speak of him who is the greatest of all, praising him,
O Right, who is bounteous to all that live. By the holy spirit
let Mazda Ahura hearken, in whose Adoration I have been instructed
by Good Thought. By his wisdom let him teach me what is best,

7.
Even he whose two awards, whereof he ordains, men shall attain,
who so are living or have been or shall be. In immortality shall
the soul of the righteous be joyful, in perpetuity shall be the
torment of Liars. All this doth Mazda Ahura appoint by his Dominion.

8.
Him thou shouldst seek to win for us by hymns of adoration
(in thy mind): "Now indeed have I seen it with mine eye,
(the Kingdom) of the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] and of (good) action and word,
since I have learnt to know Mazda Ahura through Right". Let
us offer him homage in the House of Song [Heaven].

9.
Him thou shouldst seek to propitiate for us together with
Good Thought, who at his will maketh us weal or woe. May Mazda
Ahura by his Dominion bring us to work, for prospering our beasts
and our men, so that we may through Right have familiarity with
Good Thought.

10.
Him thou shouldst seek to exalt with prayers of piety, him
that is called Mazda Ahura for ever, for that he hath promised
through his own Right and Good Thought that Welfare and Immortality
shall be for us in his Dominion strength and perpetuity in his
house.

11.
Whoso therefore in the future lightly esteemeth the Daeva
and those mortals that lightly esteem him - even all others save
that one who highly esteemeth him, - unto his shall the holy Daena
of the future deliverer, as lord of the house, be friend, brother
or father, O Mazda Ahura.

46.

1.
To what land shall I go to flee, whither to flee? From nobles
and from my peers they sever me, nor are the people pleased with
me [......], nor the Liar rulers of the land. How am I to please
thee, Mazda Ahura?

2.
I know wherefore, O Mazda, I have been unable (to achieve)
anything. Only a few herds are mine (and therefore it is so) and
because I have got but few people. I cry unto thee, see thou to
it, O Ahura, granting me support a friend gives to friend. Teach
me through the Right what the acquisition of Good Thought is.

3.
When, Mazda, shall the sunrisings come forth for the worlds
winning of Right, through the powerful teachings of the wisdom
of the future Deliverers? Who are they to whose help Good Thought
shall come? I have faith that thou wilt thyself fulfill this for
me, O Ahura.

4.
The Liar stays the supporter of Right from prospering the
cattle in district and province, infamous that he is, repellent
in his actions. Whoso, Mazda, robs him of dominion or of life,
he shall go before and prepare the ways of the good belief.

5.
If an understanding man should be able to hold one who comes
over from his vow and his ties of faith, himself having brought
him thereto, and living according to the ordinance, a righteous
man (converting) a Liar - then shall he, when he is sure of him,
tell it to the nobles, that they may protect him from injury,
O Mazda Ahura.

6.
But whoso when thus approached should refuse his aid, he shall
go to the abodes of the company of the Liar. For he is himself
a Liar, who is very good to a Liar, he is a righteous man to whom
a righteous man is dear, since thou hast created men's Selves
in the beginning, O Ahura.

7.
Whom, O Mazda, can one appoint as protector for one like me,
when the Liar sets himself to injure me, other than Thy Fire and
Thy Thought, through actions of which twain the Right will come
to maturity, O Ahura? In this lore do thou instruct my very self.

8.
Whoso is minded to injure my possessions, from his actions
may no harm come to me! Back upon himself may they come with hostility,
against his own person, all the hostile (acts), to keep him far
from the Good Life, Mazda, not from the ill!

9.
Who is it, the faithful man he, who first taught that we honor
thee as mightiest to help, as the holy righteous Lord over action?
What thy Right made known, what the Ox-Creator made known to Right,
they would fain hear through thy Good Mind.

10.
Whoso, man or woman, doeth what thou, Mazda Ahura, knowest
as best in life, as destiny for what is Right (give him) the Dominion
through Good Thought. And those whom I impel to your adoration,
with all these will I cross the Bridge of the Separator.

11.
By their dominion the Karapans and the Kavis accustomed mankind
to evil actions, so as to destroy Life. Their own soul and their
own self shall torment them when they come where the Bridge of
the Separator is, to all time dwellers in the House of the Lie.

12.
When among the laudable descendants and posterity of the Turanian
Fryana the Right ariseth, through activity of Piety that blesseth
substance; then shall Good Thought admit them, and Mazda Ahura
give them protection at the Fulfillment.

13.
Whoso among mortals has pleased Spitama Zarathushtra by his
willingness, a man deserving of good fame, to him shall Mazda
Ahura give Life, to him shall Good Thought increase substance,
him we account to be a familiar friend with your Right.

14.
O Zarathushtra, what righteous man is thy friend for the great
covenant? Who wills to have good fame? It is the Kava Vishtaspa
at the consummation. Those whom thou wilt unite in one house with
thee, these will I call with words of Good Thought.

15.
Ye Haechataspa Spitamas, I will declare unto ye so that ye
can discern the wise and the unwise. ... Through these actions
ye shall acquire Right according to the primeval laws of Ahura.

16.
Frashaoshtra Hvogva, go thou thither with those faithful whom
we both desire to be in blessedness, where with Right is united
Piety, where the Dominion is in possession of Good Thought, where
Mazda Ahura dwells to give it increase.

17.
When, O Jamaspa Hvogva, when I recount your wrongs not your
successes, (and) with your obedience the prayers of your loyalty,
(before him) who shall separate the wise and the unwise through
his prudent counselor the Right, even he, Mazda Ahura.

18.
He that holds unto me, to him I promise what is best in my
possession through the Good Thought, but enmities to him that
shall set himself to devise enmity to us, O Mazda and the Right,
desiring to satisfy your will. That is the decision of my understanding
and thought.

19.
He who accomplisheth for me, even Zarathushtra, in accordance
with Right that which best agrees with my will, to him as earning
the reward of the Other Life shall be that of two pregnant cows,
with all things whereon his mind is set. These things will thou
bring to pass for me who best knowest how, O Mazda.

Spentamainyush Gatha

47.

Translation by Bartholomae, from I.J.S. Taraporewala,
The
Divine Songs of Zarathushtra
.
Notes in square brackets [] were added by JHP.

/TR>

1. For his holy Spirit and for Best Thought, deed, and word,
in accordance with Right Mazda Ahura with Dominion and Piety shall
give us Welfare and Immortality.

2.
The best (work) of this most holy Spirit he fulfills with
the tongue through words of Good Thought, with work of his hands
through the action of Piety, by virtue of this knowledge: he,
even Mazda, is the Father of Right.

3.
Thou art the holy Father of this Spirit, which has created
for us the luck-bringing cattle, and for its pasture to give it
peace (has created) Piety, when he had taken counsel, O Mazda,
with Good Thought.

4.
From this Spirit have Liars fallen away, O Mazda, but not
the Righteous. Whether one is lord of little or of much, he is
to show love to the righteous, but be ill unto the Liar.

5.
And all the best things which by this Holy Spirit thou hast
promised to the righteous, O Mazda Ahura, shall the Liar partake
of them without thy will, who by his actions is on the side of
Ill Thought?

6.
Through this holy Spirit, Mazda Ahura, and through the Fire
thou wilt give the division of good to the two parties, with support
of Piety and Right. This verily will convert many who are ready
to hear.

48.

1. When at the Recompensings the Right shall smite the Liar,
so that what was long since made known shall be assigned to eternity
to Daevas and men, then will it exalt with thy blessings, Ahura,
him who prays to thee.

2. Tell me, for thou art he that knows, O Ahura: - shall the
Righteous smite the Liar before the retributions come which thou
hast conceived? That were indeed a message to bless the world.

3.
For him that knows, that is the best of teachings which the
beneficent Ahura teaches through the Right, he the holy one, even
thyself, O Mazda, that knows the secret lore through the wisdom
of Good Thought.

4.
Whoso, O Mazda, makes his thought (now) better, (now) worse,
and likewise his Self by action and by word, and follows his own
inclinations, wishes, and choices, he shall in thy purpose be
in a separate place at last.

5.
Let good rulers rule us, not evil rulers with the actions
of the Good Lore, O Piety! Perfect thou for man, O thou most good,
the future birth, and for the cow skilled husbandry. Let her grow
fat for our nourishing.

6.
She (Armaiti) will give us peaceful dwelling, she will give
lasting life and strength, she the beloved of Good Thought. For
it (the cattle) Mazda Ahura made the plants to grow at the birth
of the First Life, through Right.

7.
Violence must be put down! against cruelty make a stand, ye
who would make sure of the reward of Good Thought through Right,
to whose company the holy man belongs. His dwelling place shall
be in thy House, O Ahura.

8.
Is the possession of thy good Dominion, Mazda, is that of
thy Destiny assured to me Ahura? Will thy manifestation, O thou
Right, be welcome to the pious, even the weighing of actions by
the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP]?

9.
When shall I know whether ye have power, O Mazda and Right,
over everyone whose destructiveness is a menace to me? Let the
revelation of Good Thought be confirmed unto me; the future deliverer
should know how his own destiny shall be.

10. When, O Mazda, will the nobles understand the message? When
will thou smite the filthiness of this intoxicant, through which
the Karapans evilly deceive, and the wicked lords of the lands
with purpose fell?

1. Martin Schwartz tr: "When will they ban(ish) the filth
of that ditch/reciprocity-gift whereby ... the karapans commit
plunder", 'thus Yasna 48.10 contains no reference to intoxication,
let alone condemnation of haoma.' Flattery: 'the passage ... has
nothing remotely to do with sauma.' (Flattery & Schwartz,

Haoma and Harmaline
, 1989, pp. 105, 6.)

11. When, O Mazda, shall Piety come with Right, with Dominion
the happy dwelling rich with pasture? Who are they that will make
peace with the bloodthirsty Liars? To whom will the Lore of Good
Thought come?

12.
These shall be the deliverers [Saoshyants -JHP] of the provinces, who exert
themselves, O Good Thought in their action, O Asha, to fulfill
their duty, face to face with thy command, O Mazda. For these
are the appointed smiters of Violence.

49.

1.
Ever has Bendva been for me the greatest obstacle, I who desire
to give satisfaction to those who are neglected, O Right, O Mazda.
With good Ada come to me, support me firmly. Prepare for him (his)
ruin, O Good Thought.

2.
The perverter of this Bendva has long time impeded me, the
Liar who has fallen away from Right. He cares not that holy Piety
should be his, nor takes the counsel with Good Thought, O Mazda.

3.
And in this belief (of ours), O Mazda, Right is laid down,
for blessing, in the heresy the Lie, for ruin. Therefore I strive
for the fellowship of Good Thought, I forbid all intercourse with
the Liar.

4.
They who make the increase of violence and cruelty with their
tongues, the foes of cattle-nurture among its friends; whose ill
deeds prevail, not their good deeds: these (shall be) in the house
of the Daevas, (the place for) the Self of the Liar.

5.
But he, O Mazda, - happiness and satiety be his who links
his own Self with Good Thought, being through Right an intimate
of Piety. And with all these (may I be) in Thy Dominion, Ahura.

6.
I beseech you twain, O Mazda and the Right, to say what are
the plans of your will, that we may discern how we might teach
the Religion of such as you, O Ahura.

7.
And this let Good Thought hear, O Mazda, let the Right hear,
do thou also listen, O Ahura, which men of the brotherhood, what
noble is it according to the Law who brings to the community fame.

8.
On Frashaoshtra do thou bestow the most gladsome fellowship
with the Right - this I ask thee, O Mazda Ahura - and on myself
the hold on what is good in thy Dominion. To all eternity we would
be thy messengers.

9.
Let the helper hear the ordinance, he that is created to bring
deliverance. The man of right words is no regarder of fellowship
with the Liar, if they that are partakers of Right are to make
their Selves partake in the best reward at the Judgment, O Jamaspa.

10.
And this, O Mazda, will I put in thy care within thy House
- the Good Thought and the souls of the Righteous, their worship,
their Piety and zeal, that thou mayst guard it, O thou mighty
Dominion, with abiding power.

11.
But these that are of an evil dominion, of evil deeds, evil
words, evil Self, and evil thought, Liars, the Souls go to meet
them with evil food; in the House of the Lie they shall be meet
inhabitants.

12.
What help hast thou, O Right, for Zarathushtra that calls
upon me? What hast thou, Good Thought? — for me who with praises
seeks your favor, O Mazda Ahura, longing for that which is best
in your possession.

50.

1.
(Zarathushtra:) Can my soul count on any one for help? Who
is there found for my herd, who for myself a protector, indeed,
at my call other than the Right and thyself. O Mazda Ahura, and
the Best Thought?

2.
How, O Mazda, should one desire the luck-bringing cattle,
one who would fain it would come to him with the pasture?

(Mazda:) They that live uprightly according to the Right among
the many that look upon the sun, those whom they stand in judgment,
I will settle in the dwellings of the wise.

3.
(Zarathushtra:) So this (reward) shall come to him through
the Right, O Mazda, (this reward) which by the Dominion and Good
Thought he promised, whomsoever by the power of his Destiny prospers
the neighboring possession that now the Liar holds.

4.
I will worship you with praise, O Mazda Ahura, joined with
Right and Best Thought and Dominion, that they, desired of pious
men, may stand as Judges on the path of the obedient unto the
House of Song.

5.
Assured by you, O Mazda Ahura and Right, are the pointings
of the hand - since you are well-disposed to your prophet - which
shall bring us to bliss, together with visible manifest help.

6.
The prophet Zarathushtra, O Mazda, who lifts up his voice
in worship, as friend of Asha - may the Creator of Wisdom teach
me his ordinances through Good Thought, that my tongue may have
a pathway.

7.
For you I will harness the swiftest steeds, stout and strong,
by the promptings of your praise, that ye may come hither, O Mazda,
Right, and Good thought.

8.
Ever with verses that are recognized as those of pious zeal
I will come before you with outstretched hands, O Mazda, before
you, O thou Right, with worship of the faithful man, before you
with all the capacity of Good Thought.

9.
With those prayers I would come and praise you, O Mazda and
thou Right, with actions of Good Thought. If I be master of my
own destiny as I will, then will I take thought for the portion
of the wise in the same.

10.
Those actions that I shall achieve and those done aforetime,
and those, O Good Thought, that are precious in thy sight, the
rays of the sun, the shimmering uprisings of the days, all is
for your praise, O thou Right and Mazda Ahura.

11.
Your praiser, Mazda, will I declare myself and be, so long,
O Right, as I have strength and power. May the Creator of the
world accomplish through Good Thought its fulfillment of all that
most perfectly answers to his will.

51.

Translation by Bartholomae, from I.J.S. Taraporewala,
The
Divine Songs of Zarathushtra
.
Notes in square brackets [] were added by JHP.

1.
The good, the precious Dominion, as a most surpassing portion,
shall Right achieve for him that with zeal accomplishes what is
best through his actions, O Mazda. This will I now work out for
us.

2.
Before all, O Mazda Ahura, assure me the Dominion of your
possession, O Right, and what is thine, O Piety. Your (Dominion)
of blessing give through Good Thought to him that prays.

3.
Let your ears attend to those who in their deeds and utterances
hold to your words, Ahura and Right, to those of Good Thought,
for whom thou, Mazda, art the first teacher.

4.
Where is the recompense for wrong to be found, where pardon
for the same? Where shall they attain the Right? Where is the
holy Piety, where Best Thought? Thy Dominions, where are they,
O Mazda?

5.
All this (I) ask, whether the husbandman shall find cattle
in accordance with Right, he that is perfect in action, a man
of understanding, when he prays to him, who hath promised unto
the Wise the true Judge, in that he is Lord of the two destinies...

6.
Even he, Ahura Mazda, who through his Dominion appoints what
is better than good to him that is attached to his will, but what
is worse than evil to him that obeys him not, at the last end
of life.

7.
Give me, O thou that didst create the Ox and Waters and Plants,
Welfare and Immortality, by the Highest Spirit, O Mazda, strength
and continuance through Good Thought at the (Judge's) sentence.

8.
Of these two things will I speak, O Mazda, - for one may speak
to the wise, - the ill that is threatened to the Liar, and the
happiness of him who clings to the Right. For he, the Prophet,
is glad of every one who says this to the wise.

9.
What recompense thou wilt give to the two parties by thy red
Fire, by the molten metal, give us a sign of it in our souls -
even the bringing of ruin to the Liar, of blessing to the Righteous.

10.
Whoso, other than this one, seeks to kill me, Mazda, he is
a son of the Lie's creation, ill-willed thus towards all that
live. I call the Right to come to me with good destiny.

11.
What man is friend to Spitama Zarathushtra, O Mazda? Who will
let himself be counseled by Right? With whom is holy Piety? Or
who as an upright man is intent on the brotherhood of Good Thought?

12.
The Kavi's wanton did not please Zarathushtra Spitama at the
Winter Gate, in that he stayed him from taking refuge with him,
and when there came to him also (Zarathushtra's) two steeds shivering
with cold.

13.
Thus the Self of the Liar destroys for himself the assurance
of the right Way; whose soul shall tremble at the Revelation on
the Bridge of the Separator, having turned aside with deeds and
tongue from the Path of Right.

14.
The Karapans will not obey the statutes and ordinances concerning
husbandry. For the pain they inflict upon the cattle, fulfill
upon them through their actions and judgments that judgment which
at the last shall bring them to the House of the Lie.

15.
When Zarathushtra hath promised to the men of his brotherhood,
(which) in the House of Song Ahura Mazda hath first attained,
for all this I have looked through your blessings, Good Thought,
and those of Right.

16.
Kavi Vishtaspa hath the creed which the holy Mazda Ahura with
Right hath devised, together with the dominion of the Brotherhood,
and the path of Good Thought. So be it accomplished after our
desire.

17.
The fair form of one that is dear hath Frashaoshtra Hvogva
promised unto me: may sovereign Mazda Ahura grant that she attain
possession of the Right for her good Self.

18.
This creed Jamaspa Hvogva chooses through Right, lordly in
substance. This Dominion they (choose) who have part in Good Thought.
This grant me, Ahura, that they may find in thee, Mazda, their
protection.

19.
The man himself, O Maidyoi-Maungha Spitama, hath set this
before him after conceiving it in his own self. He that would
see life indeed, to him will he make known what in actions by
Mazda's ordinance is better during (this) existence.

20.
Your blessings shall ye give us, all that are one in will,
with whom Right, Good Thought, Piety, and Mazda (are one) according
to promise, giving your aid when worshipped with reverence.

21.
By Piety the man becomes Holy. Such person advances Right
through his thinking, his words, his action, his Self. By Good
Thought Mazda Ahura will give the Dominion. For this good Destiny
I long.

22.
He, I ween, that Mazda Ahura knoweth among all that have been
and are, as one to whom in accordance with Right the best portion
falls for his prayer, these will I reverence by their own names
and go before them with honor.

52.

A PRAYER FOR SANCTITY AND ITS BENEFITS.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

1.
I pray with benedictions for a benefit, and for the good,
even for the entire creation of the holy (and the clean); I beseech
for them for the (generation which is) now alive, for that which
is just coming into life, and for that which shall be hereafter.
And (I pray for that) sanctity which leads to prosperity, and
which has long afforded shelter, which goes on hand in hand with
it, which joins it in its walk, and of itself becoming its close
companion as it delivers forth its precepts, (2) bearing every
form of healing virtue which comes to us in waters, appertains
to cattle, or is found in plants, and overwhelming, all the harmful
malice of the Daevas, (and their servants) who might harm this
dwelling and its lord, (3) bringing good gifts, and better blessings,
given very early, and later (gifts), leading to successes, and
for a long time giving shelter. And so the greatest, and the best,
and most beautiful benefits of sanctity fall likewise to our lot
(4) for the sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and the praise of
the Bountiful Immortals, for the bringing prosperity to this abode,
and for the prosperity of the entire creation of the holy, and
the clean, (and as for this, so) for the opposition of the entire
evil creation. (And I pray for this) as I praise through Righteousness,
I who am beneficent, those who are (likewise of a better mind).

5-8.
(See Y8.5-8.)

Vahishtoishti Gatha

53.

Translation by Bartholomae, from I.J.S. Taraporewala,
The
Divine Songs of Zarathushtra
.

1.
(Zarathushtra) - The best possession known is of Zarathushtra
Spitama, which is that Mazda Ahura will give him through Right
the glories of blessed life unto all time, and likewise to them
that practice and learn the words and actions of his Good Religion.

2.
Then let them seek the pleasure of Mazda with thoughts, words,
and actions, unto him praise gladly, and seek his worship, even
Kava Vishtaspa, and Zarathushtra's son, the Spitamid, with Frashaoshtra,
making straight the paths for the Religion of the future Deliverer
which Ahura ordained.

3.
Him, O Pouruchista, thou scion of Haechataspa and Spitama,
youngest of Zarathushtra's daughters, hath (Zarathushtra) appointed
as one to enjoin on them the fellowship with Good Thought, Right,
and Mazda. So take counsel with thine own understanding, with
good insight practice the holiest works of Piety.

4.
(Jamaspa): Earnestly will I lead her to the Faith, that she
may serve her father and her husband, the farmers and the nobles,
as a righteous woman (serving) the righteous. The glorious heritage
of Good Thought ... shall Mazda Ahura give to her for all time.

5.
(Zarathushtra): Teachings address I to maidens marrying, and
to you (bridegrooms) giving counsel. Lay them to heart and learn
to get them within your Selves in earnest attention to the Life
of Good Thought. Let each of you strive to excel the other in
the Right, for it will be a prize for that one.

6.
So is it in fact, ye men and women! Whatever happiness ye
look for in the follower of the (...) that will be snatched away
from his person. To them the Liars, crying 'woe', shall be ill-food,
paradise shall be lost to them that despite righteousness. In
such wise ye destroy for yourselves the Spiritual Life.

7.
And to you shall accrue the reward of the Brotherhood - in
so far as the most faithful zeal is in your flesh and blood -
there where the spirit of the Liar, cringing and cowering, shall
fall down into destruction. If you separate yourselves from the
Brotherhood, then will 'woe!' be your word at the end of things.

8.
So they whose deeds are evil, let them be deceived, and let
them all howl, abandoned to ruin. Through good rulers let him
bring death and bloodshed upon them and peace from these (their
assaults) unto the happy villagers. Grief let him bring on those,
he that is the greatest, with the lord of death; and soon let
it be.

9.
To men of evil creed belongs the place of corruption. They
that set themselves to contemn the worthy, despising righteousness,
forfeiting their own body. - Where is the Righteous Lord who shall
rob them of life and freedom? Thine Mazda is the Dominion, whereby
thou canst give to the right-living poor man the better portion.

54. The Airyema-Ishyo.

1.
Let the Airyaman, the desired friend and peersman, draw near
for grace to the men and to the women who are taught of Zarathushtra,
for the joyful grace of the Good Mind, whereby the conscience
may attain its wished-for recompense. I pray for the sacred reward
of the ritual order which is (likewise so much) to be desired;
and may Ahura Mazda grant it, (or cause it to increase).

2.
We sacrifice to the Airyema-ishyo, the powerful, the victoriously
smiting, the opponent of assaulting malice, the greatest of the
sentences of the holy ritual order. And we sacrifice to the bounteous
Gathas that rule supreme in the ritual, the holy (and august).
And we sacrifice to the Praises of the Yasna which were the productions
of the world of old.

55.

THE WORSHIP OF THE GATHAS AS CONCLUDED, THAT OF THE STAOTA
YESNYA AS BEGINNING.

1.
We present hereby and we make known, as our offering to the
bountiful Gathas which rule (as the leading chants) within (the
appointed times and seasons of) the Ritual, all our landed riches,
and our persons, together with our very bones and tissues, our
forms and forces, our consciousness, our soul, and Fravashi.

2.
That which Gathas (may) be to us, which are our guardians
and defenders, and our spiritual food, yea, which (may) be to
our souls both food and clothing, such are these Gathas to us,
guardians, and defenders, and (spiritual) food, even such they
are, both food and clothing to the soul.

And (may) they be to us (for this our offering) abundant givers
of rewards, and just and righteous ones, for the world beyond
the present, after the parting of our consciousness and body.
3. And may these (Praises of the Offering) come forth, and appear
for us with power and victorious assault, with health and healing,
with progress, and with growth, with preparation and protection,
with beneficence and sanctity, and abounding with gifts toward
him who can understand; yea, let them appear (with free liberality
to the enlightened), let them appear as Mazda, the most beneficent,
has produced them, He the one who is victorious when He smites,
and who helps the settlements advance, for the protection, and
the guarding of the religious order of the settlements which are
now being furthered, and of those which shall bring salvation
to us, and for the protection of the entire creation of the holy
(and the clean).

4.
And may'st thou, (O Asha! who abidest within the Gathas),
give to every holy man who comes with this prayer for a blessing,
and endeavoring to help himself, according to his good thoughts,
and words, and deeds.

5.
We are therefore worshipping both the (divine) Righteousness
and the Good Mind, and the bountiful Gathas, that rule as the
leading chants within (the times and the seasons of) the holy
ritual order.

6.
And we worship the Praises of the Yasna which were the production
of the ancient world, those which are (now) recollected and put
in use, those which are now learned and taught, those which are
being held (in mind, and so) repeated, those remembered and recited,
and those worshipped, and thus the ones which further the world
through grace in its advance.

And we worship the part(s) of the Praises of the Yasna, and their
recitation as it is heard, even their memorized recital, and their
chanting, and their offering (as complete).

56.

INTRODUCTION TO THE SROSH YASHT.

1.
Let Sraosha (the listening Obedience) be present here for
the worship of Ahura Mazda, the most beneficent, and holy, of
him) who is desired by us as at the first, so at the last; and
so again may attentive Obedience be present here for the worship
of Ahura Mazda, the most beneficent and the holy who (is so) desired
by us.

2.
(Yea), let Sraosha (the attentive Obedience) be present here
for the worship of the good waters, and for the Fravashis of the
saints which are so desired by us, [and for (their) souls], as
at the first, so at the last.

And thus again may Sraosha (the listening Obedience) be present
here for the worship of the good, waters, and for the Fravashis
of the saints, which are so desired by us, [(and) for (their)
souls].

3.
Let Sraosha (the listening Obedience) be present here for
the worship of the good waters; yea, let the good Obedience be
here for the worship of the good and bountiful Immortals who rule
aright, and dispose (of all) aright, the good, and for the worship
of the good Sanctity, or Blessedness, who is closely knit with
the Righteous Order, to perfect us, and to incite us. May Sraosha
(Obedience) be here present for the worship of the good waters,
he the good and the holy, as at the first, so at the last.

4.
And so again may Sraosha, (Obedience) the good, be present
here for the worship of the good waters, and of the good and bountiful
Immortals, and of Blessedness the good who is closely knit with
the Righteous Order to perfect and to incite us. Yea, we worship
Sraosha the blessed and the stately, who smites with victory,
and who furthers the settlements in their advance, the holy lord
of the ritual order.

57.

THE SROSH YASHT.

1.
A blessing is Righteousness (called) the Best, &c.

Propitiation be to Sraosha, Obedience the blessed, the mighty,
the incarnate word of reason, whose body is the Mathra, him of
the daring spear, devoted to the Lord, for (his) sacrificial worship,
homage, propitiation, and praise.

I.

2.
We worship Sraosha, (Obedience, the blessed, the stately,
him who smites with the blow of victory, and who furthers the
settlements, the holy, (ruling) as the ritual lord. Him do we
worship, who in the creation of Mazda the first adored Ahura,
with the Baresman spread, who worshipped the Bountiful Immortals
(first), who worshipped both the protector and the Creator, who
are (both) creating all things in the creation.

3.
For his splendor and his glory, for his might, and the blow
which smites with victory, I will worship him with the Yasna of
the Yazads, with a Yasna loud intoned, him Obedience the blessed,
with the consecrated waters, and the good Blessedness, the lofty,
and Nairya-sangha, the stately; and may he draw near to us to
aid us, he who smites with victory, Obedience the blessed!

4.
We worship Sraosha, Obedience the blessed, and that lofty
Lord who is Ahura Mazda Himself, Him who has attained the most
to this our ritual, Him who has approached the nearest to us in
our celebrations. And we worship all the words of Zarathushtra,
and all the deeds well done (for him), both those that have been
done (in times gone by), and those which are yet to be done (for
him in times to come).

II.

5.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the stately,
him who smites with the blow of victory, who prospers the settlements,
the holy ritual lord, (6) who first spread forth the Baresman,
and the three bundles, and the five bundles, and the seven bundles,
and the nine, till it was heaped for us knee-high, and to the
middle of the thighs, for the Bountiful Immortals, for their worship,
and their homage, and their propitiation, and their praise.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might, and the blow which
smites with victory, I will worship him with the Yasna of the
Yazads, with a Yasna loud intoned, him Obedience the blessed,
with the consecrated waters.

III.

7.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, the stately, who
smites with the blow of victory, who furthers the settlements,
the holy ritual chief.

8.
Who first chanted the Gathas, the five Gathas of Zarathushtra,
the Spitama, the holy (with the fashion) of their metres, and
after the well-constructed order of their words, together with
the Zand which they contain, and the questions which they utter,
and the answers which they give, for the Bountiful Immortals,
for their sacrifice and homage, their propitiation, and their
praise.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

IV.

9.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the stately,
who smites with the blow of victory, and who furthers the settlements,
the holy ritual chief, (10) who for the poor among (our) men and
women built a mighty house, who after sunset, and with his leveled
battle-ax, smites Aeshema bloody wounds, and having struck the
head, casts him lightly (?) (to the earth), as the stronger (smites)
the weaker.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

V.

11.
We worship Sraosha, Obedience the blessed and the stately,
him who smites with the blow of victory, who furthers the settlements,
the holy ritual chief, as the energetic, and the swift, the strong,
the daring (and redoubted) hero, (12) who comes back from all
his battles (and comes from them) a conqueror, who amid the Bountiful
ImmortaIs sits as companion at their meeting.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

VI.

13.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, who is the strongest
and most persistent of the youths, the most energetic, and the
swiftest, who of all the youths strikes most with terror I from
afar (?). [Be ye desirous, O ye Mazdayasnians! of the Yasna of
Obedience the blessed.]

14.
Far from this house, this village, and this tribe, and from
this country, the evil and destructive terrors (shall) depart.
In the dwelling of that man in whose abode Obedience the blessed,
who smites victoriously, is satisfied and welcomed, there is that
holy man who thus contents him (most) forward in the thinking
better thoughts, in the speaking truthful ritual) words, and in
the doing holy deeds.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

VII.

15.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the stately,
who is the conqueror of the Kayadha, and the Kaidhya, who was
the smiter of the Lie-demon of the Daevas, the one veritably powerful,
the destroyer of the world, who is the guardian and watchman over
all the migrations (?) of the tribes.

16.
Who sleeplessly and vigilant guards the creatures of Ahura,
who sleeplessly and with vigilance saves them, who with halberd
raised on high guards all the corporeal world after setting of
the sun, (17) who has never slept in quiet since the two Spirits
made the worlds, [the bounteous and the evil one] who guards the
homes of Asha, who battles all (?) the days long and the nights
with all the Daevas [(Pazand) the Mazanian], (18) nor terror-stricken
does he turn in affright before (their power); but before him
all the Daevas turn in affright against their will, and rush to
darkness in their fear.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

VIII.

19.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, whom Haoma worshipped
on the highest height of high Haraiti, he Haoma, the reviver,
and the healer, the beautiful, the kingly, of the golden eye,
(20) of the gracious words, of the warning and the guarding words,
who intones our hymns on every side, who possesses understanding
and of every brilliant form, which abounds in many an explanation
and revelation of the word, who has the first place in the Mathra.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

IX.

21.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, whose house stands
with its thousand pillars, as victorious, on the highest height
of high Haraiti, self-lighted from within, star-studded from without,
(22) to whom the Ahuna-vairya has come, the ax of victory, and
the Haptanghaiti, and the Fshusho-mathra which smites with victory,
and all the Yasna sections.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

X.

23.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, by whose might
and victorious power, and wise conduct, and (full) knowledge,
the Bountiful Immortals descend upon this earth of seven quarters.

24.
Who as teacher of the law will stride forth upon this earth
with its dwellers in the body, and ruling as he will.

And in this Religion, Ahura Mazda has been confessed with faith,
and the Good Mind likewise with Him, and Righteousness the Best,
and Khshathra-vairya, and Piety the Bounteous, and the Universal
Weal and Immortality; and the question to the Lord is asked, and
Mazda's lore (is written).

25.
O Sraosha (Obedience), thou blessed one, and stately! protect
us for the lives; yea, for both, (for that) of this world which
is corporeal, and for the world of mind, against unhappy death,
and the remorseless Wrath of rapine, against the hosts with ill-intent,
who lift their bloody spears against us; yea, against their assaults
whom the Wrath-demon will set on, and Vidhatu, demon-made. 26.
Therefore may'st thou, O Sraosha, the blessed and the stately!
grant swiftness to our teams, soundness to our bodies, and abundant
observation of our foes, and their smiting (as we mark them),
and their sudden death.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

XI.

27.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, whom four racers
draw in harness, white and shining, beautiful, and powerful, quick
to learn, and fleet, obeying before speech, heeding orders from
the mind, with their hoofs of horn gold-covered, (28) fleeter
than (our) horses, swifter than the winds, more rapid than the
rain(-drops as they fall); yea, fleeter than the clouds, or well-winged
birds, or the we shot arrow as it flies, (29) which overtake these
swift ones all, as they fly after them pursuing, but which are
never overtaken when they flee, which plunge away from both the
weapons (hurled on this side and on that) and draw Sraosha with
them, the good Sraosha and the blessed; which from both the weapons
(those on this side and on that) bear the good Obedience the blessed,
plunging forward in their zeal, when he takes his course from
India on the East, and when he lights down in the West.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

XII.

30.
We worship Obedience the blessed and the stately, who though
lofty and so high, yea, even to the girdle, yet stoops to Mazda's
creatures, (31) who thrice within the day, and three times of
a night, will drive on to that Karshvar Hvaniratha, called the
luminous, as he holds in both the hands and poizes his knife-like
battle-ax, which flies as of itself, and to cleave the Daevas'
skulls, (32) to hew down Angra Mainyu, the wicked, and to hew
down Rapine of the bloody spear, to hew down the Daevas of Mazendran,
and every Demon-god.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might....

XIII.

33.
We worship Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the stately,
him who smites with victory, both here and not here, and on this
entire earth. And we worship all the (gifts) of Sraosha (Obedience)
the blessed, the mighty, and the strong, whose body is the Mathra.

Yea, we worship (all the martial gifts) of Sraosha (Obedience)
the mighty, both armed with shielding armor, and a warrior strong
of hand, skull-cleaver of the Daevas, conquering the endowments
of the conqueror, the holy conqueror of the conqueror, and (his)
victorious powers, and he Ascendancy which it bestows, and we
worship this Ascendancy of Sraosha's (the same which conquers
theirs); and that of Arshti do we praise as well. 34. And every
house by Sraosha guarded do we worship, wherein the blessed friendly
Sraosha is befriended and made welcome, where the holy man is
far advanced (?) in holy thoughts, and righteous words and deeds.

For his splendor and his glory, for his might, which smites with
victory, I will worship him with the Yasna of the Yazads, with
a Yasna loud-intoned, him Obedience the blessed, with the consecrated
waters, and the good Blessedness, the lofty, and Nairya-sangha,
the stately, and may he come to us to aid us, he who smites with
victory, Obedience the blessed!

58.

THE FSHUSHO MATHRA.

1.
(Introduction.) (To the increase of our homage and praise
of God) we offer this service which, as our defense, may shield
us, which is worship with its beneficent results; and Blessedness
is with it of a verity, and Piety as well. [ (Pazand) and of this
worship the results here mentioned are the well-thought thought,
the word well spoken, and the deed well done]; and let this our
worship shelter us from the Daeva and from the evil-minded man.
2. And to this worship do we confide our settlements and persons
for protection and care, for guarding, and for oversight; (3)
and in this worship will we abide, O Ahura Mazda! and with joy.

In this worship do we exercise our choices; and to it will we
approach, and to it will we belong; yea, to revering worship will
we confide our settlements and persons for protection, and for
care, for guarding, and for oversight, to such worship as is the
praise of such as You.

MATHRA.

4.
The owner of herds is the righteous (one), and he is victorious
when he strikes, and thus he is the best; [(Pazand) we therefore
offer (this) service (for herd-owners)] for the herd-owner is
the father of the Kine by the help of him who follows the ritual
order: and he is the father of the holy man as well, and of the
sanctified creation. He is in verity the bestower of blessings,
and to him, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! we render, (and his do we
make) Your greatness, Your goodness, and Your (spiritual) beauty,
and let this man, the cattle-owner, approach to guard over us;
and may he be our watchman together with the Righteous Order,
and with store for our nourishment and full generous liberality,
together with sharing of the goods, with gentleness, and with
Ahura Mazda's sacred Fire!

5.
O Ye Bountiful Immortals! as Ye have made us, so do Ye save
us, holy men, and saintly women (as we are, and steadfast in the
faith)l. Save us, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! Ye who rule aright,
and who dispose (of all) aright, for none other do I know, save
You; then with Your Righteousness do Ye save us.

6.
And we offer hereby our thoughts, and words, and actions,
our herds, and men, to the Bountiful Spirit. And may the creative
stars of Ahura Mazda, the Creator, shine down on us, and round
about us with full herds and healthy settlements, with healthy
herds and healthy men, and with all in vigor, and endowed with
the blessing of the Lord. 7. Praise to Thee, O Fire of Ahura Mazda
I may'st thou come to (us in) the greatest one of the engrossing
interests for the help of the great (effort), for the joy-producing
grace of the great (interest of our cause); grant us both Weal
and Deathlessness!

8.
We sacrifice to the entire collection of the Praises of the
Yasna, with the careful structure of their language which has
reached the most its object. And we offer (our homage) in our
celebrations to Thy body, O Ahura Mazda! the most beautiful of
forms, these stars, and to that one, the highest of the high [(Pazand)
such as the sun was called]. Yea, we worship the Praises of the
Yasna which were the production of the world of old.

59.

MUTUAL BLESSINGS.

1-17.
(See Y17.1-17.)

18-27.
(See Y26.1-10.)

28.
We worship Verethraghna, the Ahura-made, the victorious blow;
and we worship the Saoshyant, who smites with victory; and we
sacrifice to this Baresman with its Zaothra and its girdle (which
is its band) and which is spread with sanctity. And we sacrifice
to (our) own soul(s), and to (our) own Fravashi(s).

29.
(See Y17.19.)

30.
(The Ratu speaks): O thou good (servant of the Lord)! may
that be thine which is better than the good; may'st thou acquire
that which is (thine) own in the Zaothra; may'st thou attain to
that reward which the Zaotar has been obtaining, who is far advanced
in his good thoughts, and words, and deeds.

31.
(The Zaotar speaks): May that happen to you (likewise) which
is better than the good, and may that not happen which is worse
than the evil, and may that likewise not be my lot. 32. As (our)
Ahu (is) excellent, so (is our) Ratu (one who rules) from his
Righteousness, a creator of mental goodness, and of life's actions
done for Mazda, and the Kingdom (is) to Ahura which to the poor
will offer a nurturer. A blessing is Asha called the Best, &c.
We sacrifice to the Ahuna-vairya; we sacrifice to Asha Vahishta
the most beautiful, the Bountiful Immortal. And we sacrifice to
the Fshusho-mathra, the by-spoken. And we sacrifice to the entire
collection of the Praises of the Yasna; (yea), to the Yasna Praises
which were instituted in the world of yore.

60.

PRAYERS FOR THE DWELLING OF THE SACRIFICER.

1.
Thus that better than the good may he approach, who shows
to us straight paths of profit appertaining to this bodily life
and to the mental likewise, in the eternal (?) realms where dwells
Ahura; yea, may he approach it, who is Thy worthy servant, and
good citizen, O Great giver Lord!

2.
May these blessings approach this house, which are the wise
perceptions of the saints, the sacred blessings bestowed through
the ritual, their guileless characteristics, together with their
recognition of what is due; and may the Righteous Order appear
for this village, and the Divine Sovereign Power, together with
the benefit and glorious welfare (which ensues),

3.
And with these the long enduring prominence of this Religion
of Ahura's, the Zarathushtrian Faith. And may the Kine be now
with greatest speed within (the farm-yard of) this house, most
speedily may the rewarded sanctity and the strength of the holy
man be here, most speedily as well Ahura's lore. 4. And may the
good and heroic and bountiful Fravashis of the saints come here,
and may they go hand in hand with us with the healing virtues
of (their) blessed gifts as wide-spread as the earth, as far-spread
as the rivers, as high-reaching as the sun, for the furtherance
of the better men, for the hindrance of the hostile, and for the
abundant growth of riches and of glory.

5.
May Sraosha (Obedience) conquer disobedience within this house,
and may peace triumph over discord here, and generous giving over
avarice, reverence over contempt, speech with truthful words over
lying utterance. May the Righteous Order gain the victory over
the Demon of the Lie.

6.
As in this (house) the Bountiful Immortals seek for good Yasnas
and good praises from the blessed Sraosha (who governs here),
and as they seek for (one) good sacrifice and act of homage (more
especially their own) which is a good offering (to them) for (our)
salvation, and a good offering in praise, together with a long
continued offering of the entire self, (7) let not then (their)
brilliant glory ever desert this house, nor the bright abundance,
nor an illustrious offspring legitimately born, nor that long
continued companionship which is the furtherance of that good
blessedness which teaches concerning glory.

8-10.
(= Y8.5-7).

11.
In order that our minds may be delighted, and our souls the
best, let our bodies be glorified as well, and let them; O Mazda!
go likewise openly (unto Heaven) as the best world of the saints
as devoted to Ahura, (12) and accompanied by Asha Vahishta (who
is Righteousness the Best), and the most beautiful! And may we
see Thee, and may we, approaching, come around about Thee, and
attain to entire companionship with Thee! And we sacrifice to
the Righteous Order, the best, the most beautiful, the bounteous
Immortal!

61.

1.
Let us peal forth the Ahuna-vairya in our liturgy between
the heaven and earth, and let us send forth the Asha Vahishta
in our prayer the same, and the Yenhe hatam. And let us send forth
in our liturgies between the heaven and earth the pious and good
prayer of the pious man for blessings, (2) for the encounter with,
and for the displacement of Angra Mainyu with his creatures which
are likewise evil as he is, for he is filled with death (for those
whom he has made). Aye, let us send that petition forth for the
encounter with, and for the dislodgment of the Kahvaredhas and
of the individual Kahvaredha the male, and the female (to the
last individual of each), (3) and for the encounter with, and
the dislodgment of the Kayadhas, and of the individual Kayadhians,
male and female, and of the thieves and robbers, of the Zandas,
and the sorcerers, of the covenant breakers, and of those who
tamper with the covenants. 4. Yea, we send it forth for the encounter
with, and for the overthrow of the murderers of the saints, and
of those who hate and torment us for our Faith, and of those who
persecute the ritual, and the tyrant full of death. Yea, let us
peal them forth for the encounter with and the overthrow of the
wicked, O Zarathushtra Spitama! whoever they may be, whose thoughts,
and words, and works are not congenial to the holy ritual laws.

5.
And how shall we drive the Demon of the Lie from hence from
us? Aye, how shall we, the prophets who are yet to serve and save
(thy people), drive the Druj from hence, so that we, having power
over her as being utterly without power, may drive her hence with
blow from the seven Karshvars, for the encounter with, and for
the dislodgment of the entire evil world?

62.

TO THE FIRE.

1.
I offer my sacrifice and homage to thee, the Fire, as a good
offering, and an offering with our hail of salvation, even as
an offering of praise with benedictions, to thee, the Fire, O
Ahura Mazda's son! Meet for sacrifice art thou, and worthy of
(our) homage. And as meet for sacrifice, and thus worthy of our
homage, may'st thou be in the houses of men (who worship Mazda).
Salvation be to this man who worships thee in verity and truth,
with wood in hand, and Baresman ready, with flesh in hand, and
holding too the mortar. 2. And may'st thou be (ever) fed with
wood as the prescription orders. Yea, may'st thou have thy perfume
justly, and thy sacred butter without fail, and thine andirons
regularly placed. Be of full-age as to thy nourishment, of the
canon's age as to the measure of thy food, O Fire, Ahura-Mazda's
son! 3. Be now aflame within this house; be ever without fail
in flame; be all ashine within this house; be on thy growth within
this house; for long time be thou thus to the furtherance of the
heroic (renovation), to the completion of (all) progress, yea,
even till the good heroic (millennial) time when that renovation
shall have become complete. 4. Give me, O Fire, Ahura Mazda's
son! a speedy glory, speedy nourishment, and speedy booty, and
abundant glory, abundant nourishment, abundant booty, an expanded
mind, and nimbleness of tongue for soul and understanding, even
an understanding continually growing in its largeness, and that
never wanders, and long enduring virile power, (5) an offspring
sure of foot, that never sleeps on watch [not for a third part
of the day, or night], and that rises quick from bed, and likewise
a wakeful offspring, helpful to nurture, or reclaim, legitimate,
keeping order in men's meetings, (yea,) drawing men to assemblies
through their influence and word, grown to power, skillful, redeeming
others from oppression, served by many followers, which may advance
my line (in prosperity and fame), and (my) Vis, and my Zantu,
and (my) province, (yea, an offspring) which may deliver orders
to the Province as (firm and righteous rulers). 6. And may'st
thou grant me, O Fire, Ahura Mazda's Son! that whereby instructors
may be (given) me, now and for evermore, (giving light to me of
Heaven) the best life of the saints, brilliant, all glorious.
And may I have experience of the good reward, and the good renown,
and of the long forecasting preparation of the soul. 7. The Fire
of Ahura Mazda addresses this admonition to all for whom he cooks
the night and morning (meal). From all these, O Spitama! he wishes
to secure good care, and healthful care (as guarding for salvation),
the care of a true praiser. 8. At both the hands of all who come
by me, I, the Fire, keenly look: What brings the mate to his mate
(thus I say to him), the one who walks at large, to him who sits
at home? [We worship the bounteous Fire, the swift-driving charioteer.]

9.
And if this man who passes brings him wood brought (with good
measure that is) with sacred care, or if he brings the Baresman
spread with sanctity, or the Hadhanaepata plant, then afterwards
Ahura Mazda's Fire will bless him, contented, not offended, and
in (its) satisfaction (saying thus). 10. May a herd of kine be
with thee, and a multitude of men, may an active mind go with
thee, and an active soul as well. As a blest soul may'st thou
live through thy life, the nights which thou shall live. This
is the blessing of the Fire for him who brings it wood (well)
dried, sought out for flaming, purified with the earnest blessing
of the sacred ritual truth. 11. We strive after the flowing on
of the good waters, and their ebb as well, and the sounding of
their waves, desiring their propitiation; I desire to approach
them with my praise.

12.
(= Y3.24-25).

63.

(See Y15.2; Y66.2; Y38.3.)

64.

(See Y46.3; Y50.6-11.)

65.

TO ARDVI SURA ANAHITA, AND THE WATERS.

1.
I will praise the water Ardvi Sura Anahita, the wide-flowing
(as it is) and healing in its influence, efficacious against the
Daevas, devoted to Ahura's lore, and to be worshipped with sacrifice
within the corporeal world, furthering all living things (?) and
holy, helping on the increase and improvement of our herds and
settlements, holy, and increasing our wealth, holy, and helping
on the progress of the Province, holy (as she is)? 2. (Ardvi Sura
Anahita) who purifies the seed of all male beings, who sanctifies
the wombs of all women to the birth, who makes all women fortunate
in labor, who brings all women a regular and timely flow of milk,
(3) (Ardvi Sura Anahita) with a volume sounding from afar, which
is alone equal in its bulk to all the waters which flow forth
upon earth, which flows down with mighty volume from high Hukairya
to the sea Vouru-kasha. 4. And all the gulfs in Vouru-kasha are
stirred (when it falls down), all the middle doth well up when
Ardvi Sura Anahita rushes in, when she plunges foaming into them,
she, whose are a thousand tributaries, and a thousand outlets,
and each as it flows in, or rushes out, is a forty days' ride
in length to a rider mounted well.

5.
And the (chief) outlet to this one water (Ardvi Sura Anahita)
goes apart, dividing to all the seven Karshvars. And this outlet
to my river, Ardvi Sura Anahita, bears off its water always in
summer and in winter. This my river purifies the seed of men,
and wombs of women, and women's milk.

6.
Let the saints' Fravashis now draw near, those of the saints
who live, or have lived, of those born, or yet to be born; yea,
let them come near which have borne these waters up stream from
the nearest ones (that lie below as the outlet pours away) 7.
Let not our waters be for the man of ill intent, of evil speech,
or deeds, or conscience; let them not be for the offender of a
friend, not for an insulter of a Magian, nor for one who harms
the workmen, nor for one who hates his kindred. And let not our
good waters (which are not only good, but) best, and Mazda-made,
help on the man who strives to mar our settlements which are not
to be corrupted, nor him who would mar our bodies, (our) uncorrupted
(selves), (8) nor the thief, or bludgeon-bearing ruffian who would
slaughter the disciples, nor a sorcerer, nor a burrier of dead
bodies, nor the jealous, nor the niggard, nor the godless heretic
who slays disciples, nor the evil tyrant among men. Against these
may our waters come as torments. As destructive may these come
(?), may they come to him who has done those first (foul evils),
as to him who does the last.

9.
O waters! rest still within your places while the invoking
priest shall offer.

Shall not the invoker make offering to these good waters, and
with the inculcated words? (And how shall this be done?) Shall
he not be tongue-fettered, if he offers else than with the ritual?
Shall (not) the words be so delivered as the Aethrapaiti teaches?
Where shall the blessings be (inserted)? Where the supplications
with confessions? Where the gifts of those that offer? 10. (It
shall be only thus) as Ahura Mazda showed before to Zarathushtra,
and as Zarathushtra taught the corporeal worlds (the men on earth)!
Thou shalt pray the first petition to the waters, O Zarathushtra,
and after that thou shalt offer the Zaothras to the waters, sanctified,
and sought out with pious care; and thou shalt pronounce these
words (as follows, thus): (11) O ye waters, I beseech of you this
favor; and grant ye me this great one in whose bestowal ye flow
down to me for the bettering (of my state), with a never-failing
truth. O ye waters, I beseech of you for wealth of many kinds
(which gives) power (to its holder), and for an offspring self-dependent
whom multitudes will bless, and for whose wasting, or defeat,
or death, or vengeful punishment, or overtaking, no one prays.

12.
And this do I beseech of you, O waters, this, O ye lands,
and this, ye plants! This wealth and offspring I beseech of You,
O Ye Bountiful Immortals, who rule aright, who dispose (of all)
aright, O Ye good beings, male and female, givers of good things;
and this I beseech of you, O ye beneficent, mighty, and overwhelming
Fravashis of the saints, and this (of thee), O Mithra of the wide
pastures, and this of thee, O blest and stately Sraosha; and of
thee, O Rashnu the most just, and of thee, O Fire, Ahura Mazda's
son; and of thee, O lofty lord, the royal Apam-napat, of the fleet
horses; aye, of You all, ye Yazads, bestowers of the better gifts
and holy. 13. And this do ye therefore grant me, O ye holy waters,
and ye lands!

14.
And grant me likewise what is still greater than this all,
and still better than this all, and more beautiful, and more exceeding
precious (and that is, Immortality and Welfare), O Ye Yazads,
holy and ruling mightily, and powerful at once, and grant it speedily
according to this Gathic (?) word: (Yea), by veritable grace let
that be done (?) for us which is most promotive of our weal. 15.
And according to this further word again: Grant me, Thou who art
maker of the Kine, the plants, and the waters, Immortality and
likewise Weal, O Ahura Mazda, Thou most bounteous Spirit. And
grant me these two eternal gifts through Thy Good Mind in the
doctrine.

16-18.
(See Y15.2; Y56.3-4.)

66.

TO THE AHURIAN ONE.

1.
I am now offering this Zaothra here with sanctity, together
with the Haoma and the flesh, and the Hadhanaepata lifted up with
sacred regularity as to thee, O Ahurian One, for the propitiation
of Ahura Mazda, of the Bountiful Immortals, of Sraosha (Obedience)
the blessed, and of the Fire of Ahura Mazda, the ritual's lofty
lord.

2.
(=Y7,5-19.)

3.
(=Y22, Y28.24-27.)

67.

1-4.
(See Y23.1-4, replacing 'I desire to approach with sanctity'
by 'I offer with sanctity;' see also Y7.24.)

5-7.
(See Y38.3-5.)

68.

TO THE AHURIAN ONE, AND THE WATERS.

1.
We offer this to thee, O Ahurian (daughter) of Ahura! as a
help (?) for life. If we have offended thee, let this Zaothra
then attain to thee (for satisfaction), for it is thine with its
Haoma, and its milk, and its Hadhanaepata. 2. And may'st thou
approach to me for milk and for libation, a Zaothra! as health,
for healing, and for progress, for growth and in preparation for
ceremonial merit, for good renown, for equanimity and for that
victory which makes the settlements advance.

3.
Yea, we worship thee with sacrifice, O thou Ahurian (daughter)
of Ahura with the Zaothras of the good thought; and we worship,
O Ahura, one with the Zaothras of the good word and deed (4) for
the enlightenment of the thoughts, and words, and actions, for
preparation for the soul, for the settlement's advance, and to
prepare the saints endowed with ritual merit.

5.
And grant me, O thou Ahurian One! Heaven, and to have an offspring
manly and legitimate, who may promote my house, my village, my
tribe and province, and the authority thereof.

6.
We sacrifice to thee, O thou Ahurian one! And we sacrifice
to the sea Vouru-kasha, and to all waters upon earth, whether
standing, or running, or waters of the well, or spring-waters
which perennially flow, or the drippings of the rains, or the
irrigations of canals. 7. With this hymn from the (spirit of)
the Yasna do we worship thee, and with the homage which it offers
as it is the most legitimate Yasna, and homage of them (all) because
of Righteousness the Best. We sacrifice to the good waters, and
to the best, which Mazda created. 8. And we sacrifice to the two,
to the milk and to the libation, which make the waters flow, and
the plants sprout forth, opposing therein the Dragon Daeva-made,
for the arrest of that cheat the Pairika, and to contradict the
insulting malice of the Ashemaogha (the disturber and destroyer
of our Faith), and of the unholy tyrant full of death, and of
the human Daeva (worshipper) of hateful malice (and intent).

9.
And may'st thou hear our sacrificial chants O thou Ahurian
(daughter) of Ahura! Yea, be propitiated by our Yasna, O Ahurian
one! and so may'st thou be present at our Yasna; may'st thou come
to us to help, as we chant our full-offered Yasht with the full
offering of Zaothras.

10.
If any man shall sacrifice to you, O ye good waters, the Ahurian
ones of Ahura! with the best and most fitting Zaothras offered
piously, (11) to that man ye give both splendor and glory, with
health and vigor of the body and prominence of form; yea, to him
ye give possessions which entail abundant glory, and a legitimate
scion, and a long enduring life, and (Heaven at the last), the
best life of the saints, shining, all glorious. 12. And to me
also do ye now give it, to me who am offering this Yasna as a
priest.

(Response.) And to us Mazdayasnians who are likewise offering
sacrifice, do ye grant (both the desire and knowledge of the path
that is correct), to us colleagues, and disciples, Aethrapaitis
and Aethryas, men and women as well as children, and maidens of
the field, (13) who think good only, for the overwhelming of oppression
and of malice in the raids of the invader, and in face of foes
who hate. Grant to us both the desire of, and the knowledge of
that straightest path, the straightest because of Righteousness,
and of (Heaven) the best life of the Saints, shining, all glorious.
As the Ahu is excellent, so is the Ratu (one who rules) from the
Righteous Order, a creator of mental goodness and of life's actions
done for Mazda. And the kingdom (is) for Ahura, which to the poor
may offer nurture.

14.
(The Zaotar speaks): I beseech with my benediction for a safe
abode, for a joyful and a long abode for the dwellers in this
village from whence these Zaothras (which I offer come). And I
pray in my benediction for a safe abode, and a quiet and a joyful
one, and a long abiding to every Mazdayasnian village, and for
a succor even with my wants, for a succor with salutations of
salvation, and for one with praises, O Fire! and for thee, O Ahurian
one of Ahura! do I ask the fullest Yasht.

15.
And I pray for (?) Raman Hvastra for this Province, and for
healthfulness and healing. And I pray for it with my blessing
for you pious men, for all. And I pray for him who is saintly
with (true) goodness, whosoever he may be, between heaven and
the earth, for a thousand healing remedies, and for ten thousand
of the same.

16-19.
(See Y8.5-8.)

20.
Thus may it happen as I pray. 21. And by this may I gain (that)
blessing, the good Blessedness (our sanctity rewarded). And we
address, and we invoke religious zeal and capability, and the
waters with our Yasna thus: O ye good waters! since (they are)
yours, do ye, as you are asked, grant splendor and grant glory,
ye who are well able so to give; and do ye, O ye waters! grant
(once more) that helpful blessing which was gained from you of
old!

22.
Praise (be) to Ahura Mazda, and to the Bountiful Immortals.
Praise (be) to Mithra of the wide pastures. Praise to the fleet-horsed
sun. Praise to (the star which so we name, and with this sun)
Ahura Mazda's eyes. Praise to the Kine (the herds of blessed gift).
Praise to Gaya (Maretan) [Gayomard] and to the Fravashi of Zarathushtra (first
of) saints; yea, praise to the entire creation of the holy (and
the clean), to those now living, and to those just passing into
life, and to those of days to come 23. And do Thou then Ahura,
as in answer to these our prayers and songs of praise, cause us
to prosper to salvation through Thy Good Mind, the Sovereign Power,
and Thy Righteous Order (in Thy ritual and law)!

69.

(This chapter is composed of fragments: see Y15.2 and Y51.1
and 22.)

70.

TO THE BOUNTIFUL IMMORTALS, AND THE INSTITUTIONS OF RELIGION.

1.
I would worship these (the Bountiful Immortals) with my sacrifice,
those who rule aright, and who dispose (of all) aright, and this
one (especially) I would approach with my praise, (Ahura Mazda).
He is thus hymned (in our praise-songs). Yea, we worship in our
sacrifice that deity and lord, who is Ahura Mazda, the Creator,
the gracious helper, the maker of all good things; and we worship
in our sacrifice Zarathushtra Spitama, that chieftain (of the
rite).

2.
And we would declare those institutions established for us,
exact (and undeviating as they are). And I would declare forth
those of Ahura Mazda, those of the Good Mind, and of Asha Vahishta
(who is Righteousness the Best), and those of Khshatra-vairya
(the Realm to be desired), and those of the Bountiful Aramaiti
(the Piety within us), and those of Weal and Immortality, and
those which appertain to the body of the Kine, and to the Kine's
soul, and those which appertain to Ahura Mazda's Fire, (3) and
those of Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, and of Rashnu the most
just, and those of Mithra of the wide pastures, and of (the good
and) holy Wind, and of the good Mazdayasnian Religion, and of
the good and pious Prayer for blessings, and those of the good
and pious Prayer which frees one from belying, and the good and
pious Prayer for blessing against unbelieving words. 4. (And these
we would declare) in order that we may attain unto that speech
which is uttered with (true) religious zeal, or that we may be
as prophets of the provinces, that we may succor him who lifts
his voice (for Mazda), that we may be as prophets who smite with
victory, the befriended of Ahura Mazda, and persons the most useful
to Him, holy men (indeed) who think good thoughts, and speak good
words, and do good deeds. 5. That he may approach us with the
Good Mind, and that (our souls) may advance in good, let it thus
come; yea, 'how may my soul advance in good? let it thus advance.'

6.
We praise the flood and ebb of the good waters, and their
roar, and that high Ahura, the royal Apam-napat, the glittering
one, of the fleet horses; and this for the sacrifice, and homage,
and propitiation, and praise of the entire holy creation; and
may Sraosha (Obedience) be here (to aid us).

7.
(Yea), we sacrifice to Sraosha, Obedience the blessed.

71.

THE YASNA CONCLUDING.

1.
Frashaoshtra, the holy, asked the saintly Zarathushtra: Answer
me, O thou most eminent Zarathushtra, what is (in very truth)
the memorized recital of the rites?

What is the completed delivery of the Gathas?

2.
Upon this Zarathushtra said: (It is as follows.) We worship
Ahura Mazda with our sacrifice (as) the holy lord of the ritual
order; and we sacrifice to Zarathushtra likewise as to a holy
lord of the ritual order; and we sacrifice also to the Fravashi
of Zarathushtra, the saint. And we sacrifice to the Bountiful
Immortals, (the guardians) of the saints. 3. And we sacrifice
to (all) the good heroic and bounteous Fravashis of the saints,
of the bodily (world on earth), and of the mental (those in Heaven).
And we worship that one of ritual lords who attains the most his
ends; and we sacrifice to that one of the Yazads, lords of the
ritual order, who is the most strenuous, who gains the most, who
reaches most to what he seeks, even that well-timed Prayer which
is the prayer of that holy ritual lord, and which has approached
the nearest (to us for our help).

4.
We sacrifice to Ahura Mazda, the holy lord of the ritual order,
and we worship His entire body, and we worship the Bountiful Immortals
all; and we worship all the ritual lords. And we sacrifice to
the entire Mazdayasnian Faith. And we worship all the sacred metres.

5.
And we worship the entire bounteous Mathra, even the entire
system of the Faith set up against the Daevas; and we worship
its complete and long descent. And we sacrifice to all the holy
Yazads, heavenly and earthly; and we worship all the good, heroic,
and bountiful Fravashis of the saints.

6.
And we worship all the holy creatures which Mazda created,
and which possess the holy institutions, which were established
holy in their nature, which possess the holy lore, and the holy
sacrifice, which are holy, and for the holy, and to be worshipped
by the holy. And we worship all the five Gathas, the holy ones,
and the entire Yasna [its flow and its ebb, and the sounding (of
its chants)]. 7. And we sacrifice to all the Praises of the Yasna,
and to all the words which Mazda spake, which are the most fatal
to evil thoughts, and words, and deeds; (8) and which designate
the evil thought, and word, and deed, and which then cut down
and fell every evil thought, and word, and deed. [(Pazand.) One
would think of it as when the fire cuts, sucks out, and consumes
the dry wood which has been sanctified and carefully selected
(for its flame).] And we sacrifice to the strength, the victory,
the glory, and the speed of all these words (as they go forth
for their work). 9. And we sacrifice to all the springs of water,
and to the water-streams as well, and to growing plants, and forest-trees,
and to the entire land and heaven, and to all the stars, and to
the moon and sun, even to all the lights without beginning (to
their course). And we sacrifice to all cattle, and to the aquatic
beasts, and to the beasts that live on land, and to all that strike
the wing, and to the beasts that roam the plains, and to those
of cloven hoof. 10. And to all Thy good and holy female (creatures)
in the creation do we sacrifice, (O Thou who art) Ahura Mazda
the skillful maker! on account of which Thou hast made many things
and good things (in Thy world). And we sacrifice to those male
creatures in the creation which are Thine and which are meet for
sacrifice because of Asha Vahishta (of Righteousness the Best).
And we sacrifice to all the mountains brilliant with holiness,
and to all the lakes which Mazda created, and to all fires]. And
we sacrifice to all the truthful and correctly spoken words, (11)
even those which have both rewards and Piety within them. Yea,
we worship (you) for protection and shielding, for guarding and
watching; and may ye be to me for preparation.

I call upon the Gathas here, the bountiful holy ones, ruling in
the ritual order; yea, we sacrifice to you, (O ye Gathas!) for
protection and shielding, for guarding and watching. Mine may
ye be as a preparation. For me, for (mine) own soul I call on
(you), and we would worship (you) for protection and for shielding,
for guarding and for watching. 12. And we sacrifice to Weal, the
complete welfare, holy and ruling in its course in the ritual
order; and we sacrifice to Deathlessness (the immortal being of
the good), holy, and ruling in the ritual order. And we sacrifice
to the question of the Lord; and to His lore, the holy chiefs,
and to the heroic Haptanghaiti, the holy lord of the ritual order.
13. (Frasha.) Let the holy Zarathushtra himself seek out a friend
and a protector. And I say to thee (O Zarathushtra!) to make to
thee a friend holy beyond the holy, and truer than the true, for
that is the better thing; for he is evil who is the best to the
evil, and he is holy to whom the holy is a friend, (14) for these
are the best of words, those which Ahura Mazda spoke to Zarathushtra.

And do thou, O Zarathushtra! pronounce these words at the last
ending of (thy) life. 15. For if, O Zarathushtra! thou shalt pronounce
these words at the last ending of (thy) life I, Ahura Mazda, will
keep your soul away from Hell. Yea, so far away shall I hold it
as is the breadth and extension of the earth [(Pazand) and the
earth is as wide as it is long].

16.
As thou dost desire, O holy (one)! so shalt thou be, holy
shalt thou-cause (thy) soul to pass over the Chinvat Bridge; holy
shalt thou come into Heaven. Thou shalt intone the Gatha Ushtavaiti,
reciting the salvation hail.

17.
We sacrifice to the active man, and to the man of good intent,
for the hindrance of darkness, of wasting of the strength and
life, and of distraction. And we sacrifice to health and healing,
to progress and to growth, for the hindrance of impurity, and
of the diseases of the skin.

18.
And we sacrifice to the (Yasna's) ending words, to those which
end the Gathas. And we sacrifice to the bounteous Hymns themselves
which rule in the ritual course, the holy ones.

And we sacrifice to the Praise-songs of the Yasna which were the
products of the world of yore; yea, we sacrifice to all the Staota-Yesnya
hymns. And we sacrifice to (our) own soul and to (our) Fravashi.

19-21.
(See Y6.14-16.)

22.
I praise, invoke, and I weave my song to the good, heroic,
bountiful Fravashis of the saints, to those of the house, and
of the village, the district and the province, and to those of
the Zarathushtrotemas. 23. And we sacrifice to the Fire, Ahura
Mazda's son, the holy ritual chief.

And we sacrifice to this Baresman haying the Zaothra with it,
and its girdle with it, and spread with sanctity, the holy ritual
chief. And we sacrifice to Apam-napat, and to Nairya-sangha, and
to that Yazad, the wise man's swift Curse.

And we sacrifice to the souls of the dead, [which are the Fravashis
of the saints] 24. And we sacrifice to that lofty Lord who is
Ahura Mazda Himself.

25.
And we pray (again) for the Kine (once more) with these gifts
and (ceremonial) actions which are the best.

26-28.
(See Y8.5-7.)

29-31.
(See Y60.11-13.)

72.

(See Y61.)

Yasna (EN)

Glossary


================================================================================
Visperad
Source: https://www.avesta.org/visperad/vrsbe.htm
================================================================================

vrsbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VISPERAD (Extensions to the liturgy)

,
American Edition, 1898.)

Digitized by Joseph H. Peterson, Oct 8, 1999; updated Jan 19, 2024.

I have
normalized the spelling
in this text in order to provide consistent search results.

VISPERAD 1.

1. I announce,
and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the lords
of
the spiritual creatures, and to the lords of the earthly creatures,
to the lords of those which live under the waters, and to the
lords of those which live upon land, to the lords of those which
strike the wing, and to the lords of those which roam (wild) upon
the plains, to the lords of those of (home-beasts) of the cloven
hoof, holy lords of the ritual order.

1. This Visperad consists of additions to various portions of the
Yasna and its several chapters generally follow the corresponding
portions of the Yasna in the Vendidâd Sâdah. The word Visperad
means "all the chiefs" referring to the "lords of the ritual." Chapter I
should be read immediately after Yasna I, 9.

2. Or, "I invite."

3. Lords because ruling as chief objects of attention during their
mention in the course of the sacrifice, also, as in this case, genii
guarding over all of their class.

2.
I announce, and I (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Yearly
festivals, the lords of the ritual order, to Maidyozarem, the
milk-giver, the holy lord of the ritual order, and to Maidyoshahem,
the pasture-giver, and to Paitishahem, the corn-giver, and to
Ayathrem, the furtherer or breeder, the spender of the seed of
males, and to Maidyarem the cold,
the holy lord of the ritual
order, and to Hamaspathmaidyem, the especial time for ritual deeds,

holy lords of the ritual order.

4. So De Harlez, admirably following the Pahl.
sardîk
(sic).

5.
Pavan yazišn karδarîh.

3. I announce, and I (will) complete (my Yasna) to the settlements
of the future one, when the future
shall produce them as it were
anew, and I celebrate and will complete (my Yasna) to the Praises
of the Yasna
collected, completed, and much-offered, and to the
Myazdas of the saints of the ritual, male and female.

6.
Aunghairyô
, a collective or zîzanen, a participle.

7. Here is praise to a part of the Yasna itself, although not yet
recited in the V. S.

4. And I announce, and will complete (my Yasna) to the Seasons,
the lords of the ritual order, and to the heard recital of the
Ahuna-vairya, and to Righteousness the Best, to him who has (?)
our praise, and to the
Yenghe hatam
, the frequent chant of sacrifice,

the holy, and ruling in the ritual order.

8. Its chief word is
yazamaidê
, it is "the well sacrificed", the
word often occurring.

5.
And I announce and complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha Ahunavaiti,
the holy, ruling in the ritual order, and to those women who bring
forth many sons of many talents, Mazda-given, and holy lords of
the ritual order, and to that (chant) which has its Ahu and its
Ratu
(before it in the Yasna).

9. Or, "to him who is devoted to the
Ahunwar
, with its
Ahû
and
(?)."

And I celebrate, and will complete (my sacrifice) to the
Yasna Haptanghaiti
,

holy, and ruling in the ritual order, [and to the
water Ardvi Anahita
].

10. Observe the priority of the
Haptanghâiti
; it should be read
first.

11. Interpolated.

6. And I announce, and I (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha
Ushtavaiti, the holy, ruling in the ritual order, and to the mountains
which shine with holiness, the abundantly brilliant
and Mazda-made,
the holy lords of the ritual order.

12. This sense is most obvious.

And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha Spenta-mainyu,
the holy, ruling in the ritual order; and I celebrate and will
complete (my Yasna) to Verethraghna (the blow of victory
) Ahura-given,
the holy lord of the ritual order.

13. The "fiend-smiting" is the common meaning of
vritrah?
,
but
is clearly "victory" in Avestan;
vritrá
also equals defensive
valour.

7. And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha
Vohu-khshathra, holy, ruling in the ritual order, and to Mithra
of the wide pastures, and to Raman Hvastra, the holy lords of
the ritual order. And I celebrate and will complete my Yasna to
the Gatha Vahishtoishti, the holy, ruling in the ritual order.
And I celebrate and will complete my Yasna to the good and pious
Prayer for blessings, the benediction of the pious,
and to that
Yazad, the redoubted and swift Curse of the wise, the holy lord
of the ritual order.

14. Can
dahmahêca
mean "the departed saint" here?

8. And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Airyema-ishyo,
the holy lord of the ritual order, and to the
Fshusho-mathra
,
and to that lofty lord
Hadhaokhdha
,
the holy lord of the ritual
order.

15. A lost part of the Avesta, two fragments of which only survive.

9. And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the questions
asked of Ahura, and to the lore of Ahura, to the Ahurian
Dahvyuma

(
Dahyuma
), and to the Ahurian Zarathushtrotema, holy lords of
the ritual order, and to the farm-house with its pastures

which give pasture to the Kine of blessed gift, and to the holy cattle-breeding
man.

16. Comp. Y.29.2. Y.1, 10-23 follows.

VISPERAD 2.

1. In this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the
lords of (the ritual) which are spiritual with my praise; and
I desire to approach the earthly lords (as well). And I desire
to approach the lords of the water with my praise, and the lords
of the land; and I desire to approach with my praise those chiefs
which strike the wing, and those which wander wild at large, and
those of the cloven hoof, who are chiefs of the ritual (in their
turn).

1. Visperad 2 should be read after Yasna 2.8, of which it is an extension.

2.
In this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the
holy Yearly festivals with my praise, the lords of the ritual
order, Maidyozarem, the milk-giver, and Maidyoshahem, the pasture-giver,
and Paitishahem, the corn-giver, and Ayathrem the breeder, the
spender of the seed of males, Maidyarem, the cold, Hamaspathmaidyem,
the especial time for ritual duties, the holy lords of the ritual
order.

3.
And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the future one of the settlements with my praise, the holy lord
of the ritual order, when the future one shall produce (them as
it were anew).

And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach all
these chieftains of the ritual with my praise whom Ahura Mazda
mentioned to Zarathushtra for sacrifice and homage because of
Asha Vahishta (of Righteousness the Best).

4. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
Thee,
the lord, with my praise, Thou who art Ahura Mazda, the
spiritual lord and regulator
of the spiritual creatures [the lord
and regulator of the spiritual creation].

And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach thee,
Zarathushtra Spitama, with my praise, the terrestrial (lord and
regulator) of the terrestrial creation, [the lord and regulator
of the terrestrial creation].

2. It is certainly not impossible that the idea of "invoking the
approach of Ahura" was meant, but "approaching him" is more
natural.

3.
Ahûmca ratûmca
, applied to the same person, the usage
arising from an erroneous rendering of the
Ahunwar
; see Y.19.12.

5. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the man who recites the ritual rites with my praise, who is maintaining
thus the thought well thought, and the word well spoken, and the
deed well done, and Piety the bountiful, even him
who maintains
the Manthra of the Saoshyant, by whose actions the settlements
are advanced in the righteous order.

4.
Yô
with K7
, K11,
daretem
, passive form; or, "who (has) the
Mãthra held." The text must, however, be in disorder.

6. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the (yearly) Seasons with my praise, the holy lords of the ritual
order, and the Ahuna-vairya (
Ahunwar
)as it is recited, and
Asha Vahishta

when he is lauded,
and the Yenhe hatam, the frequent chant of
sacrifice.

5. In the
Ashem Vohu
.

7.
And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the Gatha Ahunavaiti with my praise. And in this Zaothra with
this Baresman I desire to worship those women with my praise who
are well portioned,
and of good parentage, and who are stately
in their growth; yea, I desire to approach that chant in my praise
which has the Ahu and the Ratu, [for He is verily the one who
has the Ahu and the Ratu, that is, Ahura Mazda
].

And I desire to approach the heroic Yasna Haptanghaiti in my praise,
the holy, and ruling in the ritual order; and Ardvi Sura Anahita,
the holy, and ruling in the ritual order.

6. So the Pahlavi.

7. Erroneous Pazand.

8. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the Gatha Ushtavaiti with my praise, the holy, and ruling in the
ritual order; and I desire to approach those mountains
with my
praise which shine with holiness, abundantly glorious, Mazda-made,
the holy lords of the ritual order, and the Gatha Spenta-mainyu,
and Verethraghna, the blow of victory, Mazda-given, the holy lord
of the ritual order, and the Victorious Ascendancy (which it bestows).

8. This sentence affords support to my rendering of
âyêsê
, as
expressing a desire to approach, rather than one for the approach of
(the Genius of) the Mountain; at the same time the latter idea may
possibly be the correct one. (Expressions are curtailed.)

9. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the Gatha Vohu-khshathra with my praise, the holy, and ruling
in the ritual order, and Mithra of the wide pastures, and Raman
Hvastra, and the Gatha Vahishtoishti, and the pious and good prayer
for blessings, and the pious and holy man, and that Yazad, the
redoubted and swift curse of the wise.

10. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the
Airyema-ishyo
with my praise, and the
Fshusho-manthra
, and
that lofty lord, the Hadhaokhdha, holy lord(s) of the ritual order.

11. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
the question asked of Ahura, and the lore of the Lord (which he
reveals in answer) and the farm-house of the man possessed of
pastures, and the pasture produced for the Kine of blessed gift,
and the holy cattle-breeding man.

9. Y. 2.10 follows Visperad 2.
[The plan of the arrangement given is found in Mf2, JP1, Fl1, Kh1, K4,
8, J11, Jm5, S2, L5, Br1 with explanations in Pahlavi, Pazend, or New-Persian,
in Mf2 in the two former; cf. Y. 58, 6. The words
AdOSt aNdarg urwIs

(fireplace within the hallowed area) belong together. The Zot speaks first
at the place of the Havan, then at that of the Adarvaksh etc. It is here supplied
from Geldners edition, and was not included in the SBE edition. -JHP]

VISPERAD 3.

BEGINNING OF THE HAOMA OFFERING; ROLL-CALL OF THE PRIEST.

1. This chapter 1-5 follows Y. 11.1-8 in the Vendîdâd Sâdah; so, appropriately.

1.
(The Zaotar speaks.)
(I call for) the Havanan,
and would have
him here.

(The Ratu answers.)
I will come (and fulfill his duties).

(The Zaotar speaks.)
I would have the Atarevakhsha
here.

(The Ratu answers.)
I will come (and fulfill the services which
fall to his charge).

(The Zaotar.)
I would have the Frabaretar.

(The Ratu.)
I will come (and fulfill the services which fall to
his charge).

(The Zaotar.)
I would have the Aberet
present.

(The Ratu.)
I will come (for him).

(The Zaotar.)
I would have the Asnatar.

(The Ratu.)
I will come (and do the duties which he serves).

(The Zaotar.)
I would have the Raethwishkar
to be here.

(The Ratu.)
I will come (for him).

(The Zaotar.)
I would have the Sraoshavareza
present, the wisest
one, the most correct and veracious in his speech

(The Ratu.)
I will come.
2.
(The Zaotar.)
I would have the Fire-priest
to be here, and the warrior, and the thrifty tiller
of the earth,
and the house-lord, and the lords of the Vis and the Zantu.

2. The Ratu answers for all according to the rubric printed by
Westergaard, but of later origin than the text. It arose from the
fact that the several offices were later united in that of the Ratu.
Originally the corresponding official answered to his title. The
Hâvanan was the Mobad who pounded the Haoma in the mortar.

3. The Mobad who fed the Fire.

4. The Mobad who aided the presentations.

5. The water carrier.

6. The washer.

7. The mixer (?), or the Mobad who attended to disinfections.

8. The Mobad who attended to penance.

9. The typical layman.

3. And I summon the youth of holy thoughts, words and works,
and of good conscience; (yea), the youth of good speech, given
(in marriage) to his kin.
And I summon the province-ranger, and
the itinerant of many arts, and the house-mistress.

10. This important custom was fully treated in the lost Nask,
No. 16 (or No. 18 by another reckoning).

4. And I summon the woman advanced in her holy thoughts, and
words, and deeds, and well subordinated, whose ruler is her lord,

the holy one, who is (as) the bounteous Armaiti; (yea), I summon
even Thy wives, O Ahura ! And I summon likewise the holy man advanced
in his good thoughts, and words, and deeds, who is learned in
pious lore, and innocent of the Kayadha,
and by whose deeds the
settlements are furthered in the righteous order.

11. So the most, but
ratukhshathra
means elsewhere "ruling in
the ritual as supreme."

[12.
P. Oktor Skjaervo
explains this as "magician, sorcerer".
According to W. Malandra (
Introduction to Ancient
Iranian Religion
1983, p. 187, this was "a type of evil person,
perhaps "astrologer". Le Coq: "adepte d'une hérésies" ("follower of a heresy") -JHP]

5.
Yea, we summon you, whoever you may be, if only chiefs of
the Mazdayasnians; and we summon the Bounteous Immortals, and
the pious Saoshyants (the prophets for our help), the most correct
and truthful in their speech, the most zealous, the most glorious
in their thoughts, the greatest ones, and the powerful; and we
summon the Fire-priests, and the warriors, and the diligent husbandman
of the Mazdayasnian faith.

6.
(The Zaotar.) As an Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, the Atarevakhsha
(announcing) speaks forth
to me.

(The Ratu [?].) So let the Ratu from his righteousness, holy and
learned, speak forth.

(The Ratu.) As an Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, the Zaotar (announcing)
speaks forth to me.

(The Zaotar.) So let the Ratu from (his) righteousness, holy and
learned, speak forth.

(The Ratu.) Thou art the announcer for us, O
Fire-priest! [(Pazand.) It is the
Zaotar (who is meant).]

(The Zaotar.) I will come as this Zaotar, and recite the Staota
Yesnya with memorized intoning, chanting, and praise.

13. This section follows Y. 11.9-15 in the V.S., preceding a
section described as Y. 11.59, 60 in the B.V.S.

14. Probably in an imperative sense, or, with some, an infinitive.

15. Read
Zaotasti
which contains sandhi. It seems a gloss to
explain the
Athraom
(sic). It is
zaotâ asti
.

VISPERAD 4.

1. (Yea,) we sacrifice to the thoughts of the mind, and to the
good wisdom, and to the good and blessed sanctity, and to the
good religious knowledge, and to good health (of soul and body).
[At their (several) seasons, and with the presence of seasonable
circumstances, they are hymned.
] 2. Confession is to be made for
the Kine; we, Zarathushtrian Mazdayasnians, celebrate at the sacrificial
time for the Myazda-offering, at the time for the Ratufriti, the
prayer for blessings, for the sacrificial worship, homage, propitiation,
and praise of the entire creation of the holy (and the clean).

1. This section, preceding Y. 11, closed in the B.V.S., seems to me
to belong properly after Yasna 8, and the Myazda offering with
the Ratufrîti.

2. Pazand.

VISPERAD 5.

1. I come to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! as a praiser priest,
and invoker, as a memoriser, reciting (Your ritual), and as a
chanter for Your sacrifice and homage, Your propitiation, and
Your praise; (yea, for Yours) the Bountiful Immortals, and for
our preparation, (O ye holy Saoshyants!) and for your well-timed
prayer for blessings, and your sanctification, and for our victorious
smiting of our foes, beneficial (as it is) for our souls, for
ours, the Saoshyants, (with you), and holy. 2. And I make my offering
to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals, who rule aright, and who dispose
(of all) aright! (Yea), I offer You the flesh of my very body,
and all the blessings of my life as well.

1. This piece should be read after Yasna 14, with which it is
nearly identical. The language of the translation is slightly varied
to relieve the effect of sameness.

3.
And I confess my belief in Thee, O Ahura Mazda! and as a Mazdayasnian
of the order of Zarathushtra, and in accordance with this Faith.

VISPERAD 6.

1. In accordance with the precept, with praise, and with the
joyful reception of grace, with Zaothras intelligently offered,
with sacrificial words correctly spoken, I call the good Amesha
Spenta by their names of beauty; yea, I worship the Bountiful
Immortals by their beautiful names, with the blessing of the ritual
Order, with the longing blessing of Righteousness the good.

1. Nearly identical with Yasna 15.

VISPERAD 7.

1. We worship the (sacrificial) words correctly uttered, and
Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, and the good Ashi, (the blest
order of our rites), and Nairyosangha. And we worship the victorious
Peace as the unprostrated and unmoved. And we sacrifice to the
Fravashis of the saints, and to the Chinwad Bridge, and to the
Garo-Nmana of Ahura, even Heaven, the best world of the saints,
the shining and all glorious!

1. This chapter should be read after Yasna 17, which it appropriately
follows in the Vendîdâd Sâdah.

2.
And we sacrifice to that better path
that leads to that Best
World (as well). And we worship Arshtat (Justice) the good, which
helps the settlements to advance and flourish, benefiting them
thereby, that Arshtat which is the Mazdayasnian Faith; and (with
her) we worship Rashnu the most just, and Mithra of the wide pastures.
And we worship Parendi the wealthy, wealthy with a wealth of thoughts,
with a throng of words, and with a breadth of actions, [for she
makes our persons agile (for good thoughts and words and actions)]
3. And we worship that virile defensive
Heroism which possesses
men who think beforehand, and heroic men, which is fleeter
a than
the fleet, stronger than the strong, which comes to him who is
endowed by God, which, when especially made theirs by men, produces
one who is a freer of the body. And we worship Sleep,
the Mazda-made,
the gladdener of the herd and men. 4. And we worship those things
in the creation of the holy which are the ancient institutions,
those formed before the sky, the water, the land, the plants,
and the Kine of blessed gift. And we worship the sea Vouru-kasha,
and the stormy wind which is made by Mazda, and the shining heaven,
of old created, the first-made earthly object of (all) the earthly
world.

2. Possibly, "the best better course of that best world."

3. One might consider, "virile power which has men and heroes
in the mind beforehand;" but
vareti=gûrdîh
.

4.
Âsyayau
(sic) and
takhmôtãsyayau
(sic) agree with feminines;
possibly because of the male qualities referred to. They might be
said to be in apposition rather than in agreement with the feminine.

5. Sleep is elsewhere an evil; a Demon Bûshyãsta rules it; but
this is untimely sleep; see, on the other hand, Y. 44.5.

5.
And we worship thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son! the holy
lord of the ritual order, and this Baresman, having the Zaothra
with it, and the girdle with it, spread out with sanctity, the
holy ritual chief, and we worship Apam-napat (the son of waters)

VISPERAD 8.

1. With this word be Thou approached,
with the proper word be
Thou present here, Thou who art Ahura Mazda, the holy, together
with the good Yazads who are the Bountiful Immortals, who rule
aright, and dispose (of all) aright, together with fifty, and
a hundred, and a thousand, and ten thousand, and millions, and
yet more.

1. "Mediated" (?), or "known,"
madhayangha
(
-uha
).

2.
And to Him who rules the best let the Kingdom be!

2. See Y. 35.5.

VISPERAD 9.

1. (I desire to offer my homage and my praise
) to the offered
Haomas and Zaothras, and to those also which shall yet be offered,
which smite victoriously, and are foes of hatred, and following
in company (as they do) with the healing virtues of sanctity,
following also in company with those of Chisti (religious knowledge),
and with the remedies of Mazda, and with those of Zarathushtra
and the Zarathushtrotema, (2) and to the offered Haomas and Zaothras
which accompany those remedies which belong to the holy disciple
well versed in good devices,
and accompanying those of the itinerant
also versed in good devices, and accompanying those likewise of
the good Mazdayasnian Faith, and those of the pious and beneficent
Prayer for blessings, and of the pious and good veracity, and
of the pious word against unbelief, (3) for information and explanation,
for preparation (?) and devotion, for the libation and complete
offering, for the complete recital of the liturgy memorized as
well; and to those Haomas which are pungent, bounteous, holy,
and offered with sanctity (and for a blessing), to those which
are yet to be offered with sanctity, and which are now being celebrated,
and which are likewise in the future to be celebrated, to those
which are being pressed with sanctity, and to those which are
yet to be pressed, (to these I desire to approach, and to express
my homage and my praise). 4. And I desire to express my homage
and my praise to the strength of the strong, and to the victorious
blow of the mighty, to the powerful Rectitude and Blessedness,
to Chisti and the Priority for the powerful Ascendancy, and to
these powerful Yazads which are the Bountiful Immortals, who rule
aright, and dispose of all aright, ever-living, ever-helpful,
who, male and female, dwell together with the Good Mind, (to these
I desire in my homage and my praises to approach); (5) (yea, I
desire to approach for homage and praises toward) our Universal
Weal and Immortality, to the body of the Kine, and to the Kine's
Soul. (And I desire to approach) the Fire of the spoken name,

and toward that farm-house which is sanctified and which has fields
and comfort,
and mercy (for the poor); (6) as a praiser with praise
for the sacrifice, homage, which is this praise of Ahura Mazda,
of the Bountiful Immortals, and of the holy and lofty Lord, for
the sacrifice, and homage of the Lord that most attains his ends,
and which is this praise of that blessedness which has approached
us, and of that well-timed prayer for blessings offered in the
ritual, (7) which is likewise the praise of the Mathra Spenta
(the bounteous word of reason), and of the Mazdayasnian Religion,
and the Praises of the Yasnas, which is also that of all the lords
of the ritual, and of all the well-timed prayers for blessings,
for the sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and glorification of
the entire creation of the holy (and the clean).

1. This section should be read before Y. 32.

2. Supplied necessarily from Vr. 10.2; see its genitive.

3. Or "sciences" (in some cases medical).

4. Having a Yasht.

5. Here is an instance where
hvâthra
may mean "comfort."

VISPERAD 10.

1. I desire to approach the Arezahi with my praise, and the
Sawahi, and Fradadhafshu, and Widadhafshu, and Wouru-bareshti,
and Wourujareshti, and this Karshwar which is Xwaniratha. 2.
And I desire to approach the stone mortar with my praise, and
the iron mortar, and the cup that holds the Zaothra, and the hair
(which stays the spilling)
, and Thy Baresman spread with sanctity.
And I desire to approach the Ahuna-vairya [
Ahunwar
] with my praise, and
the ritual prayers beside Ahuna, and the standing offices of the
Mazdayasnian Faith.

1. This section follows Y. 22.

2. The
varesa
consists (as used at present) of three, five, or seven
hairs from the tail of a white bull, which are tied to a gold, silver,
copper, or brass ring. This can be used as long as the bull lives,
but as often as it is used it must be reconsecrated. (Haug.)

VISPERAD 11.

1. To Ahura Mazda would we present
our offered Haomas and that
which is lifted up, as the most beneficial to Verethraghna (the
blow of victory) which furthers the settlements; and that which
is offered to the good and holy king, and that which is offered
to the holy ruler which rules according to, or in the ritual,
and we make known our Haomas to the Bountiful Immortals, and to
the good waters; and we present our Haomas each to (our) own soul;

and we announce our Haomas in our celebration to the entire creation
of the holy (and the clean).

1. The wording is purposely varied in the renderings to avoid sameness.

2. To the soul of the person who may be reciting.

2. Yea, we present these Haomas and Haoma implements, and these
spread mats, and these Myazdas, these stones, the first in the
creation, the stone mortar brought here with the yellow
Haoma
in it, and the iron mortar brought here with the yellow Haoma
in it, this Haoma-water, and this Baresman spread with sanctity,
(3) these bodies, and (their) forces, these striving Zaothras
(that seek to find Thy grace), this holy Haoma, and the flesh,
and the holy man, and the saint's innate thoughts, even the Saoshyants'
innate thoughts.

And we present this fresh milk as an offering, now lifted up with
sanctity, and this Hadhanaepata plant, lifted up with sanctity;
(4) and we offer, and present these Zaothras with our celebration,
having the Haoma with them, and the milk, and the Hadhanaepata,
to the good waters and offered up with piety. And we present the
Haoma-water in our celebrations to the good waters, and both the
stone and the iron mortar, (5) and this branch for the Baresman,
and the prayer for blessings uttered at the fitting moment which
has approached (for our help in its order with the prayers), and
the recollection and practice of the good Mazdayasnian law, and
the heard recital of the Gathas, the well-timed prayer for blessings
as it comes uttered by the saint (and for our help), and ruling
(while it is spoken) as a ritual lord, and these wood-billets,
and the perfume even Thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! and
all good objects (which are ours), and Mazda-made, and which have
the seed of sanctity (or are that seed).

3.
Zâiri
with K4.

6. Yea, these we make known and we announce in this our celebration
to Ahura Mazda (as our gift), and to Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed,
and to Ashi (who is the recompense),and to Rashnu the most just,
and to Mithra of the wide pastures, and to the Bountiful Immortals,
and the Fravashis of the saints, and to their souls, and to the
Fire of Ahura Mazda, the lord, and to the lofty lord (the Apam-napat?),
and to the Myazda, the lord, and to the well-timed prayer for
blessings as it rules in the order of our prayers, for the sacrifice,
homage, propitiation, and adoration of the entire creation of
the holy (and the clean).

7. Yea, these we make known in this our celebration hereby for
the Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama, the saint, for its sacrifice,
homage, propitiation, and praise, and to the (Fravashi) of Anghuyu (?)

who hath loved righteousness, together with all the holy Fravashis
of the saints, of those now dead, and of those of the living,
and of those of men unborn, of the prophets that shall serve us,
bringing on the renovation of the completed world.

4. Here, erroneously, a proper name as in Yasht 13. Possibly
of that Zarathushtrian world (period) which loved righteousness; the
word occurs after the name of Z. I think that "y" should be "v."

8-11. (See verses 2-5.)

12. Yea, we would make these known hereby in our celebrations
to the Bountiful Immortals, who rule

aright, and who dispose (of
all) aright, the ever-living, ever-helpful, who are good (?),
and bestowers of the good, who dwell with the Good Mind: [(Pazand)
for they who are the Bountiful Immortals abide with the Good Mind,
they who rule aright, and dispose (of all) aright, for thence
they are regulated, and thence they arose, (namely,) from the
Good Mind
].

5. Vohu Manah certainly appears the most prominent here. They
arose from the "good thought" of Ahura.

13. And we make known these our celebrations as
the more promotive for this
house, for the furtherance
of this house, and as benefits for this house,
because of the increase of this household, as overcoming
the restrictions which impede this household,
and as overcoming the harmful malice which may
mar this house, to bless its herds, and its retainers,
born, and yet to be born, for the saints of the house
as it was aforetime, of it as it
stands here now, and
to which we likewise now belong as the Saoshyants of
the provinces, (14) [which (is that we are Saoshyants)
for the saints who do good deeds, and of the female
saints who do good deeds, and of the saints who do
the deeds conspicuously good, and of the females
likewise thus, of the saints who do good deeds upon
good deeds, and of the females thus the same].

6. This office was celebrated in private houses by itinerant priests.

7.
Yênhê aêm
might be a citation from some lost prayer. The
singular
aêm
may, however, be taken collectively, as families are
spoken of.

15.
And we make these known in our celebrations to the good Fravashis
of the saints which are formidable and overwhelming in their aid.
16. And we make these known in our celebrations hereby to Sraosha
(Obedience) the blessed, and to the good Blessedness, and to Nairya-sangha,
and to the victorious Peace, and to Ahura Mazda's Fire, and to
the lofty lord, for sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and for praise,
to the entire creation of the holy and the clean.

17-18.
(=Vr10.1-2.)

19. Yea, we make that known which is lifted up in offering, and
which is the Avesta
as the holy Ahura Mazda directed that it should
be said, and as Zarathushtra, the holy, directed, and as I, the
priest, who am acquainted with their sacrifice and homage, am
now letting it be known. I who understand the lawful and legitimate
Avesta,
and the ritual prescripts (20) for Your sacrifice, homage,
and propitiation, O Ye who are the Bountiful Immortals, and for
our preparation (?), and for the success of our well-uttered prayer
for blessings, for victory, sanctification, and the well-being
of our souls, (of ours), for (we are) the holy Saoshyants.

8.
Âvista
probably =
Avesta
; compare Veda. The moral and ceremonial laws.

9. Avestic.

21. Yea, we make these known in our celebrations here, and we
offer them to Him who is Ahura Mazda, of all the greatest, the
master and the Lord.

VISPERAD 12.

1.
For the offered Haomas which have been offered
in libation to that lofty Lord Ahura Mazda and to
the holy Zarathushtra Spitama (produce) abundance
in cattle and in men; and this
abundance is (as) the
good Sraosha, who accompanies (us) with the great

splendor of sanctity, and may he
be here with energetic effort (to aid
us in our worship).

1. Follows Y.27.

2.
Hâ
seems to have a certain conjunctive force like
sa
in composition,
"And thereto the good Sraosha;" or is it an interjection?

3. Recall
hecâ
of Y.46.1.

2.
We offer the wise offerings of the Ahuna-vairya [
Ahunwar
] intoned with
sanctity and yet to be intoned, possessing their many teachings
of religious wisdom (as they to), and those of the two mortars
which pour the Haomas out, and which are pushed forward with precision,

and are now in the course of being thus advanced once more.
3.
(And so we teach as well the many teachings of the religious wisdom)
contained in the words correctly spoken, in the Zarathushtrian
utterances,
and in the ceremonies correctly practiced, and the
Baresmans spread exactly, and the Haomas pressed correctly, and
the praise, Yasnas, and the doctrines of the Mazdayasnian Religion
with their recitations, and their movements. 4. For thus they
may become to us more full of devices and of wisdom, and so we
offer these wise ritual deeds in the creation, so we impart them
with their many points of meaning while we (ourselves) still ponder
them as those which Ahura Mazda, the holy One, delivered, which
have (as if) their nourishment from Vohu Manah
and their growth
from the Righteous Order, which are the greatest of all beings,
the best, and the most beautiful; for thus shall these be to us
the more full of wisest meaning, and more full of incitation
and
may we be among those (who are) of Spenta Mainyu's world in that
we are imparting (to the chosen) these precepts of the wisest
meaning and these incitations which are contained therein. 5.
And full of wisest meaning be ye two to us, O (thou) stone mortar,
and (thou) the iron one, as ye are now turned, and as ye are now
being advanced,
ye two mortars of the house, [and of the village,
of the tribe, and of the province, and ye who are in this house
(itself), this village, tribe, and province]; yea, in those which
are ours, Mazdayasnians, who are steadfast in our worship, who
appear with our wood-billets and our perfumes, and with our supplicated
blessings [(Pazand) for so may they be to us, the more full of
wisest teaching].

4. With punctilious sanctity.

5. The Parsi priests at present make appropriate manipulations here.

6. In the now ancient Gâthas, & c.

7. Compare
gaethau vispau yau vohû thraoshtâ mananghâ
.

8. Or, "may we be more zealous than any who are in the
creation of the bounteous spirit."

9. Referring to manipulations.

VISPERAD 13.

1. According to the ritual we worship Ahura Mazda; according
to the ritual we worship the Bountiful Immortals; and we sacrifice
to the sacrificial word correctly spoken, and to every Manthra
(as to a sacred word of reason). And we sacrifice to Zarathushtra,
him who is especially the possessor of the Manthra;
and we sacrifice
to the 'blessings for the saints';
and we worship the 'hail'
addressed
to the Bountiful Immortals.

1. This fragment follows Y.30 in the Vendîdâd Sâdah, and
was written in allusion to Y.28, Y.29, and Y. 30.

2. Referring to
manthra srevaêmâ
in Yasna 28.8.

3. Referring to the words
savacâ ashavabyô
in Yasna 30.11.

4. Referring to the word
ushtâ
in Yasna 30.11.

2. Also we worship the three principal (chapters)
uttered (in the Yasna) without addition or omission;

and we worship the three principal ones without
addition or omission; we worship the three commencing
ones entire without addition or omission.

And we worship the entirety
of the three principal
ones without addition or omission; and their
Has
,
their metrical lines, their words, and their word-structure
[and their recital, memorizing, chanting, and
their steadfast offering].

5. The three first chapters 28-30; the text has bad
grammar, or broken connection.

6. It is difficult to see how
anapishûtâ
can mean "without retrenchment,"
but the context seems to require it, and the Pahlavi translation
bears evidence to it. Perhaps read
anapashûtâ
.

7. "The whole three first." Some suppose the three prayers to be
intended (the Ahuna vairya, the Ashem Vohû, and the Yênhê hât?m).
I think that the three chapters 28-30 are meant.
As the piece follows those three chapters in the Vendîdâd Sâdah,
so its expressions indicate a reference to them. This might tend to
show that the Ahunavaiti was at one time, if not originally, divided
at this place .

VISPERAD 14.

1. (We worship Ahura Mazda, the holy Lord of the
ritual order;
and we sacrifice to the Gatha Ahunavaiti)
with its measures, and word-structure, and its
Zand, with its questions and counter-questions, with
its words and its metric feet. And we sacrifice to
these as well-recited, and now in the course of being recited, as well-worshipped,
and now in the course of being used in worship.
2. (Yea, we sacrifice to it) in

its own "wisdom",
in its own "clearness",
in its own
"loving intention",
in its sovereignty, and its own
ritual order, and its "acquired boon",
which is also
that given by Ahura Mazda for the promotion of
piety, for that thought which originates from the
"heart-devoted self".

1. This fragment was written in evident allusion to the entire
Ahunavaiti, which it follows in the Vendîdâd Sâdah. It expresses
the veneration acquired by the first Gâtha long after its composition

2. From the Vendîdâd Sâdah.

3.
Frâyazentam
may be a metaplasm; otherwise "of the sacrificers."

4.
Dãmi
with K4. Possibly in their own house (
dãmi dani
).

5. These words probably allude severally, say, to
dãm
in Y. 31.7,

cithrâ
in Y. 31.22,
zaoshê
in Y. 33.2, 10,

âyaptâ
in Y. 28.8, to
zarzdau
in Y. 31.1.

3. Also we worship the Ahuna-vairya, the holy lord of the ritual
order, the holy lord with its Ahu and its Ratu [(Pazand); for
He is the one with the title Ahu and Ratu, who is Ahura Mazda
].
4. And we sacrifice to the constituent parts of the Gatha Ahunavaiti,
to its chapters, and its metrical lines, its words, and word-structure,
[and to its heard-recital, and memorized recital, its continuous
and its steadfast offering].

6. Erroneous.

VISPERAD 15.

1. Hold your feet in readiness, and your two hands, and your
understandings,
O ye Zarathushtrian Mazdayasnians! for the well-doing
of lawful deeds in accordance with the sacred Order, and for the
avoidance of the unlawful and evil deeds which are contrary to
the ritual. Let the good deeds for the furtherance of husbandry
be done
here. Render ye the needy rich.

2. Let Sraosha (Obedience)
be present here for the worship of Ahura Mazda,

the most helpful,
and the holy, who is so desired by us in the pronunciation, and
for the service, and the pondering
of the Yasna Haptanghaiti,
for the heart's devotion to it, for its memorization, and its
victorious and holy recital (or for the victorious saint), without
addition or omission, (3) which has been intoned, and which shall
yet be uttered as great, powerful, smiting with victory, separate
from harmful malice, for the pronunciation of victorious words
for Ahura Mazda's Fire.

1. This piece is a later composed prelude to the Haptanghâiti,
which it precedes in the Vendîdâd Sâdah.

2.
Sursum corda!

3. Comp.
gavôi verezyâtãm
, Y. 48.5.

4. "Place the needy with those without need."

5. Possibly
mazdâtaêca
.

4-5. (=Vr9.6-7.)

VISPERAD 16.

1. And we worship the Fire here, Ahura Mazda's son, and the Yazads
having the seed of fire in them, and the Rashnus having the seed
of fire
in them; and we worship the Fravashis of the saints. And
we worship Sraosha who smites with victory, and the holy man,
and the entire creation of the holy (and the clean). 2. And we
worship the Blessedness and the Fravashi of Zarathushtra Spitama,
the saint. And we worship the saints and their blessed Fravashis
(as of one). And we worship all their Fravashis (as considered
each apart), and those of the saints within the Province, and
those of the saints without the Province, yea, we worship the
Fravashis of holy men and holy women (wherever they may be, those
devoted to the Order of the Faith). And we sacrifice to those
whose (service)

for us in the Yasna Ahura Mazda, the holy, has
known as the better,
and of these Zarathushtra is the
living chief
and master. And we sacrifice to the fields
and the waters, the lands and the plants, and to the
constituent parts of the Yasna Haptanghaiti, its
chapters, its metered lines, its words, and word structure.

1. This piece follows the Haptanghâiti in the Vendîdâd Sâdah;
it was intended as a sequel to it.

2. Having the power to propagate its worship, maintaining it
unextinguished. De Harlez makes the admirable suggestion,
"bright as flame"; but the Pahlavi renders
tokhmak
.

3. Comp. Y. 51.22.

4.
Anghushca ratushca
here referred to the same person; comp.
ahû
.

VISPERAD 17.

1. An addition to chapter 16.

1.
And we strive after the good thoughts, words, and deeds inculcated
in the Yasna Haptanghaiti. A blessing is the Right (called) the
Best, (there is) weal; (there is) weal for this (man) when toward
Righteousness Best (there is) right.

VISPERAD 18.

1. We worship Ahura Mazda with the
ushta
.
And we worship the
Amesha Spenta with the ushta, and the holy man, the saint. And
we worship the prior world of the holy (and of the clean) with
an ushta, and the state of weal and salvation for the holy man
(the saint).

1. This piece having reference to various expressions in the
Gâtha Ushtavaiti, follows it in the Vendidâd Sâdah.

2. Referring to
ushtâ in Y. 43.1.

2. And we worship that life-long state of blessedness (for the
holy) which is the evil man's calamity;
yea, we worship his eternal

salvation, and with the salvation prayer. And we sacrifice to
every saint who exists, who is now coming into existence, and
who shall exist in future.

3. See Y. 45.7.

4.
Akaranem
= the eternal thing; otherwise an adjective of two
terminations; or, finally, read
-ãm
.

VISPERAD 19.

1. We worship Ahura Mazda the bountiful; and we worship the Bountiful
Immortals (saying the Spenta). And we sacrifice to the bountiful
saint, and to the bountiful anticipative understanding.
Also we
sacrifice to the good and bountiful Armaiti (the ready mind).
And we worship her together with
the bountiful creatures in the
creation of the pure. And we sacrifice to the holy creatures who
have intelligence as their first,
(to those foremost in their
mind). And we worship the omniscient understanding, and Him who
is Ahura Mazda (Himself).
2. And we sacrifice to the shining sun,
which is the highest of the high; yea, we worship the sun together
with the Bountiful Immortals, and the Manthras with their good
ceremonies.
Also we sacrifice to the glorious achievements, and
to this glory (which we have gained). And we sacrifice to the
herds which have the Fire and its blessings.
Also we worship the
holy benefit which is so widely diffused,
and that wisdom which
is the bounteous Armaiti, whose are the laws
of the Righteous
Order, and of those holy creatures who have Righteousness as their
first.

1. The word
spenta
throughout alludes to the Gâtha Spentâmainyu,
but it is of course not without grammatical application.

2. In the
Bundahishm
especially referred to Ahura.

3. Or, "together with the bountiful creatures we worship the holy creatures."

4. This expression may have been accidentally determined by
the position of the word
manô
in the Ahuna vairya [Ahunwar] formula;
see Y. 19.12.

5. Or, "the well-fulfilled."

6. "Fire-made" is unintelligible; "fire gifts-having" may refer to
the flocks and herds, as expressing the source of that prosperity
which is represented by the holy Fire.

7. Pahl.
fravaft sûd
.

8.
Dâthra
with K4.

VISPERAD 20.

1. (Homage to the Gatha Vohu-khshathra!
We sacrifice to the Vohu-khshathra),
(the good kingdom) even the Khshathra-vairya, the kingdom to be
desired; and we sacrifice to the iron-founding,
and to the (sacrificial)
words
correctly spoken which smite (the foe) with victory, and
which hold the Daevas subject.

1. This piece from the later Avesta follows Y. 51, in the Vendidâd Sâdah.

2. From the Vendîdâd Sâdah.

3. Associated with this Gâtha from Y. 51.9.

4. Compare Y. 51.3.

And we worship that reward and that health, that
healing and that progress, that growth and that
victorious smiting
(2) which are between the
Vohu-khshathra and the Vahishtoishti,
(and which are
acquired by us) by the memorized recital of the good
thoughts, good words, and good deeds, for the withstanding of evil thoughts,
and words, and deeds; yea, for the undoing of all treacherous
thoughts (directed) against me, and of all false words, and unfair
deeds. 3. [And we sacrifice to the later
Yasna, the heroic Haptanghaiti,

(and which as it recurs becomes) the holy ritual chief.]

5. Y. 51.9; also perhaps Y. 53.8, 9.

6. Between; that is, described in the space between the Vohu-khshathra
and the Vahishtôishti, i.e.in Y. 52. See
hamisteê
in
Y. 52.4, and
paitishtâteê
in Visp. 20.2.

7. This would seem misplaced; perhaps Y. 42 is meant,
which follows the Haptanghâiti.

VISPERAD 21.

1.
We strive earnestly, and we take up our Yasna and our homage
to the good waters, and to the fertile fruit-trees (which bear
as of themselves), and to the Fravashis of the saints; yea, we
take up our Yasna, and our homage earnestly to those beings which
are (so) good, the waters, and the trees, and the Fravashis of
the saints, (2) and to the Kine, and to Gaya (Maretan) [Gayomard], and to
the Manthra Spenta (the bounteous word-of-reason), the holy, which
works (within and for us with effect), to these we take up our
Yasnas and our homage with earnest zeal, and to Thee, O Ahura
Mazda I and to thee, O Zarathushtra, we do the same; and to thee,
O lofty lord (the Apam-napat), and to the Bountiful Immortals.
3. And we sacrifice to the listening (that hears our prayers)
and to that mercy, and to the hearing of (our spoken) homage,
and to that mercy which is (shown in response to our offered)
praise. And we sacrifice to the
fraraiti vidushe
, which is contained
in the piece
hvadaenaish ashaonis
; and we sacrifice to 'the good
praise which is without hypocrisy, and which has no malice (as
its end)'; and we sacrifice to the later Yasna and to its offering;
and we sacrifice to the chapters of the later Yasna, and to its
metrical lines, its words, and word-structure.

VISPERAD 22.

1. With this chant (fully) chanted, and which is for the Bountiful
Immortals and the holy Saoshyants (who are the prophets who shall
serve us), and by means of these (ceremonial) actions, which are
(of all)

the best, we desire to utter our supplications for the
Kine. It is that chant which the saint has recognized
as good and fruitful of blessed gifts, and which the
sinner does not know.

May we never reach that (ill-luck that the sinner) may outstrip
us (in our chanting), not in the matter of a plan (thought out),
or of words (delivered), or ceremonies (done
), nor yet in any
offering whatever when he (?) approaches (us for harm).

1. The parties are divided by knowledge and ignorance (compare
the Gnosis). See Y. 31.12.

2. Not in thought, word, or deed may we reach his priority
in progress.

VISPERAD 23.

1. We worship Ahura Mazda as the best
(worship to be offered
in our gifts). We worship the Amesha Spenta (once more, and as)
the best. We worship Asha Vahishta (who is Righteousness the Best).
And we sacrifice to those (prayers) which are evident as the best;
that is, the Praises of the Yasnas.

Also we sacrifice to that best wish, which is that of Asha Vahishta,
and we worship Heaven, which is the best world of the saints,
bright and all glorious; and we sacrifice likewise to that best
approach which leads to
it. 2. And we sacrifice to that reward,

health, healing, furtherance, and increase, and to
that victory which is within
the two, the Ahuna-vairya
and the Airyema-ishyo, through the memorized
recital of the good thoughts, words, and deeds (which they enjoin).

1. This piece from the later Avesta follows Y 53, in the Vendîdâd Sâdah,
and has reference to its expressions.

2. It is an important suggestion which holds
vahishtem
as equal
to "saying
vahishtem
," in allusion to the
Vahishtâ îshtish
; but as the
word is inflected further on (see
vahishtahê
), and as it moreover
once applies to Asha, as Asha Vahishta, it is better to render it
as having adjective application throughout, being none the less, of
course, an intentional echo of the first word of Y. 53.1.

3. Or, "of it."

4. Possibly "between them," meaning the Gâthas which are so placed.

vrsbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 1
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd1sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd1sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 1.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.

For an analysis see
Mary Boyce,
Zoroastrianism : Its Antiquity and Constant Vigour
(Columbia Lectures on Iranian Studies, No 7)
(Costa Mesa, Mazda Pub, 1992, pp. 3 ff.)
and A. Christensen,
Le premier chapitre du Vendidad
(Copenhagen, 1943).

Synopsis:

This chapter is an enumeration of sixteen perfect
lands created by Ahura Mazda, and of as many plagues created in
opposition by Angra Mainyu.

Many attempts have been made, not only to identify
these sixteen lands, but also to draw historical conclusions from
their order of succession, as representing the actual order of
the migrations and settlements of the old Iranian tribes.
But there is nothing in the text to support such wide inferences
We have here nothing more than a geographical description of Iran,
seen from the religious point of view.

Of these sixteen lands there are nine, as follows:--

AVESTAN NAME.
OLD PERSIAN.
GREEK
MODERN NAME.

Sughdha (2)
Suguda

Sogdianh
Soghd (Samarkand)

Mouru (3)
Margu

Margianh
Marv

Bakhdhi (4)
Bâkhtri

Baktra
Balkh

Haroyu (6)
Haraiva

`
Areia
Harê(rud)

Vehrkana (9)
Varkâna

'
Urkania
Gurgân, Jorgân

Harahvaiti (10)
Harauvati

`
Aracwsia
Av-rokhaj, Arghand-(âb)

Haetumant (11)

`
EtumandoV
Helmend

Ragha (12)
Ragâ

'
Ragai
Raî

Hapta hindu (15)
Hindava

`
Indoi
Hind (Punjab)

which can be identified with certainty, as we are
able to follow their

names from the records of the Achaemenian kings or the works of
classical writers down to the map of modern Iran.

For the other lands we are confined for information
to the Pahlavi Commentary, from which we get:

AVESTAN NAME.
PAHLAVI NAME.
MODERN NAME.

Vaekereta (7)
Kâpûl
Kabul

Urva (8)
Mêshan
Mesene

Varena (14)
Patashkhvârgar or Dailam
Tabaristân or Gîlân

Rangha (16)
Arvastâni Rûm
Eastern Mesopotamia

The identification of Nisaya (5) and Chakhra (13) remains an
open question, as there were several cities of that
name. We know, however, that Nisaya lay between Balkh and Marv.
The first province Airyanem Vaeja, or Eranwej, we identify with
the medieval Arrân (nowadays known as Karabagh).

There must have been some systematical idea in the
order followed, though it is not apparent, except in the succession
of Sughdha, Mouru, Bakhdhi, Nisaya, Haroyu, Vaekereta (numbers
2-7), which form one compact group of north-eastern provinces;
the last two provinces, Hindu and Rangha (numbers 15-16), are
the two limitroph provinces, east and west (Indus and Tigris);
and the Rangha brings us back to the first province, Eranwej,
whose chief river, the Vanguhi Daitya, or Aras, springs from
the same mountains as the Rangha-Tigris.

The several plagues created by Angra Mainyu to mar
the native perfection of Ahura's creations give instructive information
on the religious condition of several of the Iranian countries
at the time when this Fargard was written. Harat seems to have
been the seat of puritan sects that pushed rigorism to the extreme
in the law of purification. Sorcery was prevalent in the basin
of the Helmend river, and the Paris were powerful in Cabul, which
is a Zoroastrian way of saying that the Hindu civilisation prevailed
in those parts, which in fact in the two centuries before and
after Christ were known as White India, and remained more Indian
than Iranian till the Moslem conquest.

FARGARD 1. Sixteen perfect lands created by Ahura Mazda, and
as many plagues created by Angra Mainyu.

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama
Zarathushtra,
saying:

I have made every land dear (to its people),
even though it had no charms whatever in it
: had
I not made every land dear (to its people), even
though it had no charms whatever in it, then the
whole living world would have invaded the Airyana
Vaeja
.

Notes:

1. Or Spitamide. Zarathushtra was descended from Spitama at the
fifth generation.

2. 'Everyone fancies that the land where he was born and has been
brought up is the best and fairest land that I have created' (Comm.)

3. Greater Bundahish: 'It is said in the Sacred Book: had I not
created the Genius of the native place, all mankind would have
gone to Eran-Vej, on account of its pleasantness.' — On Airyanem
Vaeja or Eran-Vej, see following note.

2.
The first of the good lands and countries
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the Airyana
Vaeja
, by the Vanguhi Daitya
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created the serpent in the river
and
Winter, a work of the Daevas
.

4. Clause 2 in the Vendidad Sada is composed of
Zend quotations in the Commentary that illustrate the alternative
process of creation: 'First, Ahura Mazda would create a land of
such kind that its dwellers might like it, and there could be
nothing more delightful. Then he who is all death would bring
against it a counter-creation.'

5. Airyanem Vaeja, Iran-Vej, is the holy land of Zoroastrianism:
Zarathushtra was born and founded his religion there
(
Bund. 20.32
;

32.3
):
the first animal couple appeared there
(
Bund. 14.4
;

Zadspram, 9.8
).
From its name, 'the Iranian seed,' it seems to
have been considered as the original seat of the Iranian race. It has
been generally supposed to belong to Eastern Iran, like the provinces
which are enumerated after it, chiefly on account of the name
of its river, the Vanguhi Daitya, which was in the Sassanian
times (as Veh) the name of the Oxus. But the Bundahish distinctly
states that Iran-Vej is 'bordering upon Adarbajan'
(
29.12
);
now, Adarbaijan is bordered by the Caspian Sea on the east, by
the Rangha provinces on the west, by Media proper on the south,
and by Arran on the north. The Rangha provinces are out of question,
since they are mentioned at the end of the Fargard (verse 20), and
the climatic conditions of Iran-Vej with its long winter likewise
exclude Media and suit Arran, where the summer lasts hardly two
months (cf. § 4, note 6). The very name agrees, as the country
known as Arran seems to have been known to the Greeks as

`Ariania
(Stephanus Byz.), which
brings it close to our Airyanem. On the Vanguhi Daitya, see following
note.

6. The Vanguhi Daitya, belonging to Arran, must be the modern
Aras (the classic Araxes). The Aras was named Vanguhi, like the
Oxus, but distinguished from it by the addition Daitya, which made
it 'the Vanguhi of the Law' (the Vanguhi by which Zarathushtra
received the Law).

7. 'There are many Khrafstras in the Daitik, as it is said, The
Daitik full of Khrafstras' (
Bund. 20.13
). Snakes abound on
the banks of the Araxes (Morier,
A Second Journey
, p. 250)
nowadays as much as in the time of Pompeius, to whom they
barred the way from Albania to Hyrcania (Plut.)

8. Arran (Karabagh) is celebrated for its cold winter as well as
for its beauty. At the Naoroz (first day of spring) the fields still lie
under the snow. The temperature does not become milder before
the second fortnight of April; no flower is seen before May.
Summer, which is marked by the migration of the nomads from
the plain to the mountains, begins about the 20th of June and
ends in the middle of August.

3. There are ten winter months there, two
summer months
; and those are cold for the waters
,
cold for the earth, cold for the trees
. Winter falls
there, the worst of all plagues. [Hum 35: "Ten are there the winter
months, two the summer months, and even then [in summer] the waters are
freezing, the earth is freezing, the plants are freezing; there is the
center of winter, there is the heart of winter, there winter rushes
around, there (occur) most damages caused by storm."]

9. Vendidad Sada: 'It is known that [in the ordinary course
of nature] there are seven months of summer and five of winter'
(see
Bund. 25
).

10. Some say: 'Even those two months of summer are cold for
the waters...' (Comm.; see
Mainyo-i-khard
44.20
).

11. Vend. Sada: 'There reigns the core and heart of winter.'

4. The second of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
plain
which the Sughdhas inhabit
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,

and he counter-created the locust
, which brings
death unto cattle and plants.

12. Doubtful.

13. Old P. Suguda; Sogdiana.

14. The plague that fell to that country was the bad locust: it
devours the plants and death comes to the cattle' (
Gr. Bund.
)

5. The third of the good lands and countries
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the strong, holy
Mouru
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created plunder and sin
.

15. Margu;
Margianh
; Marv.

16. Doubtful. The
Gr. Bd.
has: 'The plague that fell
to that country was the coming and going of troops: for there
is always there an evil concourse of horsemen, thieves, robbers,
and heretics, who speak untruth and oppress the righteous.' — Marv
continued to be the resort of Turanian plunderers till the recent
Russian annexation.

6. The fourth of the good lands and countries
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the beautiful
Bakhdhi
with high-lifted banner.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created
the ants and the ant-hills
.

17. Bakhtri;
Baktra
; Balkh.

18. 'The corn-carrying ants' (Asp.; cf.
Farg. 14.5
).

7. The fifth of the good lands and countries
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Nisaya
, that
lies between the Mouru and Bakhdhi.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created the sin of unbelief
.

19. By contradistinction to other places of the same name. There
was a Nisaya, in Media, where Darius put to death the Mage
Gaumata (
Behishtun I, 58
). There was also a Nisâ
in Fars, another in Kirman, a third again on the way from Amol
to Marv (Tabari, tr. Noeldeke, p.101, 2), which may be the same
as
Nisaia
, the capital of Parthia
(
Parqaunisa
ap. Isid. of Charax 12); cf. Pliny
VI, 25 (29). One may therefore he tempted to translate, 'Nisaya
between which and Bakhdhi Mouru lies;' but the text hardly admits of that
construction, and we must suppose the existence of another Nisaya
on the way from Balkh to Marv.

20. There are people there 'who doubt the existence of God (Comm.)

8. The sixth of the good lands and countries
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the house-deserting
Haroyu
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created tears and wailing
.

21. Harôyu, Old P. Haraiva (transcribed in Greek and Latin

'Areia
Aria instead of
`Areia

Haria, by a confusion with the name of the Aryans); P. Harê
(in Firdausi and in Harê-rûd; Harât is an Arabicised
form. — 'The house-deserting Harê: because there, when a
man dies in a house, the people of the house leave it and go.
We keep the ordinances for nine days or a month: they leave
the house and absent themselves from it for nine days or a month'
(
Gr. Bd.
) See
Vd5.42
.

22. 'The tears and wailing for the dead,' the voceros. The
tears shed over a dead man grow to a river that prevents his
crossing the Chinwad bridge
(
Saddar 96
;

Arda Viraf 16.7, 10
).

9. The seventh of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was
Vaekereta
, of the evil shadows.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created the Pairika Knathaiti
, who
claves unto Keresaspa.

23. Vaêkereta, an older name of Kabul (Kâpûl: Comm.
and Gr. Bd.); perhaps the Ptolemeian
Bagarda

in Paropanisus (Ptol. VI, 18).

24. The Pairika, in Zoroastrian mythology, symbolises
idolatry (uzdes-parastih). The land of Kubul, till the Moslem
invasion, belonged to the Indian civilisation and was mostly of
Brahmanical and Buddhist religion. The Pairika Khnathaiti will
be destroyed at the end of the world by Saoshyant, the unborn
son of Zarathushtra (when all false religions vanish before the
true one;
Vd19.5
). — Sama Keresaspa,
the Garshasp of later tradition, is the type of impious heroism:
he let himself be seduced to the Daeva-worship, and Zarathushtra
saw him punished in hell for his contempt of Zoroastrian observances.

10. The eighth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Urva
of the rich pastures
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created the sin of pride
.

25. Urva, according to
Gr. Bd.
Mêshan, that is to say
Mesene (
Meshnh
) the region of lower
Euphrates, famous for its fertility
(Herod. I, 193 [?]): it was for four centuries (from about 150 B.C. to 225 A.D.) the
seat of a flourishing commercial state.

26. 'The people of Meshan are proud: there are no people worse
than they' (Gr. Bd.)

11. The ninth of the good lands and countries
which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was Khnenta which
the Vehrkanas
inhabit.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created a sin for which there is no
atonement, the unnatural sin
.

27. 'Khnenta is a river in Vehrkâna (Hyrcania)'
(Comm.); consequently the river Jorjan.

28. See
Vd8.31-2
.
[Hum2 228 (shyaothna yânaô-vaeipya): "pederasty"]

12. The tenth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
beautiful Harahvaiti
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created a sin for which there is no
atonement, the burying of the dead
.

29. Harauvati;
`Aracwsia
;
corrupted into Ar-rokhag (name of the country in the
Arabic literature) and Arghand (in the modern name
of the river Arghand-âb).

30. See
Vd3.36 ff
.

13. The eleventh of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
bright, glorious Haetumant
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all
death, and he counter-created the evil work of witchcraft.

31. The basin of the
EtumandroV
or Erymanthus,
now Hermend, Helmend, that is to say, the region of Saistân.

14. And this is the sign by which it is known,
this is that by which it is seen at once: wheresoever
they may go and raise a cry of sorcery, there
the
worst works of witchcraft go forth. From there they
come to kill and strike at heart, and they bring
locusts as many as they want
.

32. In Haetumant. — 'The plague created against Saistan is
abundance of witchcraft: and that character appears from this,
that all people from that place practise astrology: those
wizards produce ... snow, hail, spiders, and locusts ' (
Gr Bd.
)
Saistan, like Kabul, was half Indian (Maçoudi, II, 79-82),
and Brahmans and Buddhists have the credit of being proficient in
the darker sciences.

33. This clause seems to be a quotation in the Pahlavi
Commentary.

15. The twelfth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was
Ragha
of the three races
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death, and he counter-created
the sin of utter unbelief
.

34. Ragha, transcribed Râk and identified by the
Commentary with Adarbaijan and 'according to some' with Rai (the
Greek '
Ragai
in Media). There were
apparently two Raghas, one in Atropatene, another in Media.

35. 'That means that the three classes, priests, warriors,
and husbandmen, were well organised there' (Comm. and
Gr. Bd.
)

36. 'They doubt themselves and cause other people to
doubt' (Comm.)

16. The thirteenth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
strong, holy Chakhra
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,

and he counter-created a sin for which there is no
atonement, the cooking of corpses
.

37. There were two towns of that name (Charkh), one in
Khorasan, and the other in Ghaznin.

38. 'Cooking a corpse and eating it. They cook foxes
and weasels and eat them' (
Gr. Bd.
) See
Vd8.73-4.

17. The fourteenth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
four-cornered Varena
, for which was born
Thraetaona, who smote Azi Dahaka [Zohak].

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created abnormal issues in women
,
and barbarian oppression
.

39. Varn, identified by the Comm. either with Patashkhvârgar
or with Dailam (that is to say Tabaristan or Gilan). The
Gr.
Bd.
identifies it with Mount Damavand (which belongs to
Patashkhvargar): this is the mountain where Azi Dahaka [Zohak] was bound
with iron bonds by Thraetaona [Faridoon]. — 'Four-cornered:'
Tabaristan has rudely the shape of a quadrilateral.

40.
Vd16.11 ff
.

41. The aborigines of the Caspian littoral were Anarian
savages, the so-called 'Demons of Mazana [Mazendaran].'

18. The fifteenth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
Seven Rivers
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created abnormal issues in women,
and excessive heat.

42. Hapta hindava, the basin of the affluents of the
Indus, the modern Panjab (= the Five Rivers), formerly called Hind,
by contradistinction to Sindh, the basin of the lower river.
[Hum34: "the PhlT of V1.18 quotes the fragment

haca ushastara hinduua auui daoshatarem hindum

'from the eastern river to the western river'.]

19. The sixteenth of the good lands and
countries which I, Ahura Mazda, created, was the
land by the sources (?) of the Rangha
, where people
live who have no chiefs
.

Thereupon came Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
and he counter-created Winter
, a work of the
Daevas
.

43. 'Arvastin-i-Rum (Roman Mesopotamia)' (Comm.), that is to
say, the basin of the upper Tigris (Rangha = Arvand = Tigris).

44. 'People who do not hold the chief for a chief' (Comm.), which
is the translation for asraosha (Comm. ad XVI, 18), 'rebel
against the law,' and would well apply to the non-Mazdean people
of Arvastân-i-Rûm.

45. The severe winters in the upper valleys of the Tigris.

46. The
Vendidad Sada
has here: taozyâka danheush
aiwishtâra, which the
Gr. Bd.
understands as:
'and the Tajik (the Arabs) are oppressive there.'

20. There are still other lands and countries
,
beautiful and deep, longing and asking for the good,
and bright. [Hum2 54: lands and regions, beautiful,­deep, esteemed, brilliant and bright.]

47. 'Some say: Persis' (Comm.)

vd1sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 2
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd2sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd2sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 2. Yima (Jamshed) and the deluge.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the Denkard, Dk Book 8, Chapter 44.

Also, compare this translation with those given in Malandra,

Introduction to Ancient Iranian Religion
(p. 178 ff.),
and Boyce
Textual Sources for the Study of Zoroastrianism
(pp. 94 ff.)

For a comparison of the underground enclosure of Yima with the
the Indic/Sanskrit Yama as ruler of the underground, see Bruce Lincoln

Death, War, and Sacrifice
(Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
1991, p. 28).

Also see Mary Boyce,
History of Zoroastrianism
I (Leiden, Brill,
1975 second impression with corrections, pp. 92 ff.)

Synopsis:

This Fargard may be divided into two parts.

First part (1-20). Ahura Mazda proposes to Yima, the son of
Vivanghat, to receive the law from him and to bring it to men.
On his refusal, he bids him keep his creatures and make them
prosper. Yima accordingly makes them thrive and increase, keeps
death and disease away from them, and three times enlarges the
earth, which had become too narrow for its inhabitants.

Second part (21 to the end). On the approach of a dire winter,
which is to destroy every living creature, Yima, being advised by
Ahura, builds a Vara to keep there the finest representatives
of every kind of animals and plants, and they live there a life of
perfect happiness.

It is difficult not to acknowledge in the latter legend a Zoroastrian
adaptation of the deluge, whether it was borrowed from the
Bible

or from the Chaldaean mythology. The similitude is so striking
that it did not escape the Moslems, and Macoudi states that
certain authors place the date of the deluge in the time of Jamshed.
There are essential and necessary differences between the two
legends, the chief one being that in the monotheistic narration
the deluge is sent as a punishment from God, whereas in the dualistic
version it is a plague from the Daevas: but the core of the two
legends is the same: the hero in both is a righteous man who,
forewarned by God, builds a refuge to receive choice specimens
of mankind) intended some day to replace an imperfect humanity,
destroyed by a universal calamity.

FARGARD 2. Myths of Yima [Jamshed]

I.

Notes:

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda:

O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker
of the material world, thou Holy One!

Who was the first mortal, before myself, Zarathushtra,
with whom thou, Ahura Mazda, didst
converse
, whom thou didst teach the Religion of Ahura,
the Religion of Zarathushtra?

1. 'On the Religion' (Comm.)

2. Ahura Mazda answered:
The fair Yima, the good shepherd
, O holy Zarathushtra!
he was the first
mortal, before thee, Zarathushtra, with whom I, Ahura Mazda, did
converse, whom I taught the Religion of Ahura, the Religion of
Zarathushtra. 3. Unto him, O Zarathushtra, I, Ahura Mazda, spake,
saying: 'Well, fair Yima, son of Vivanghat, be thou the preacher
and the bearer of my Religion!' And the fair Yima, O Zarathushtra,
replied unto me, saying: 'I was not born, I was not taught to
be the preacher and the bearer of thy Religion.'

2. His being a good shepherd means that he held in good condition
herds of men and herds of animals' (Comm.)

4. Then I, Ahura Mazda, said thus unto him, O Zarathushtra: 'Since
thou dost not consent to be the preacher and the bearer of my
Religion, then make thou my world increase, make my world grow:
consent thou to nourish, to rule, and to watch over my world.'

5. And the fair Yima replied unto me, O Zarathushtra, saying:
'Yes! I will make thy world increase, I will make thy world grow.
Yes! I will nourish, and rule, and watch over thy world. There
shall be, while I am king, neither cold wind not hot wind, neither
disease nor death.'

6.
Then I, Ahura Mazda, brought two implements unto him: a
golden seal and a poniard inlaid with gold
. Behold, here Yima
bears the royal sway!

3. Vd2.6 is composed of unconnected
Avesta
quotations,
which are no part of the text and are introduced by the commentator
for the purpose of showing that 'although Yima did not teach the
law and train pupils, he was nevertheless a faithful and a holy
man, and rendered men holy too (?).' See Fragments of the Vendidad.

4. As the symbol and the instrument of sovereignty. 'He reigned
supreme by the strength of the ring and of the poniard' (Asp.)
Thus Faridoon gives royal investiture to Iraj 'with the sword and
the seal, the ring and the crown' (Firdausi). -- The king is master
'of the sword, the throne, and the ring.'

7. [Obscure.]

8. Thus, under the sway of Yima, three hundred winters passed
away, and the earth was replenished with flocks and herds, with
men and dogs and birds and with red blazing fires, and there was
room no more for flocks, herds, and men.

9. Then I warned the fair Yima, saying: 'O fair Yima, son of Vivanghat,
the earth has become full of flocks and herds, of men and dogs
and birds and of red blazing fires, and there is room no more
for flocks, herds, and men.'

10. Then Yima stepped forward, in light
, southwards
,
on the way of the sun
, and (afterwards) he
pressed the earth with the golden seal, and bored it
with the poniard, speaking thus: 'O Spenta Armaiti
,
kindly
open asunder and stretch thyself afar, to
bear flocks and herds and men.'

5. That is to say, his body being all resplendent with light. See
Albiruni's Chronology (tr. by Sachau, p. 202): 'Jam rose on that
day (Noruz) like the sun, the light beaming forth from him, as
though he shone like the sun.'

6. The warm South is the region of Paradise
(
Hadhokht Nask, section 2.7
):
the North is the seat of the cold winds, of the demons and hell
(
Vd19.1
;
Vd7.2
).

7. Thence is derived the following tradition recorded by G. du
Chinon: 'Ils en nomment un qui s'allait tous les jours promener
dans le Ciel du Soleil d'où il aportait la sciance des Astres,
aprez les avoir visités de si prez. Ils nomment ce grand personnage
Gemachid' (Relations nouvelles du Levant, Lyon, 1671, p. 478).

8. The Genius of the Earth.

9. 'Do this out of kindness to the creatures' (Comm.)

11. And Yima made the earth grow larger by one-third than it was
before, and there came flocks and herds and men, at their will
and wish, as many as he wished.

12. Thus, under the sway of Yima, six hundred winters passed away,
and the earth was replenished with flocks and herds, with men
and dogs and birds and with red blazing fires, and there was room
no more for flocks, herds, and men.

13. And I warned the fair Yima, saying: 'O fair Yima, son of Vivanghat,
the earth has become full of flocks and herds, of men and dogs
and birds and of red blazing fires, and there is room no more
for flocks, herds, and men.'

14. Then Yima stepped forward, in light,

southwards, on the way of the sun, and (afterwards) he
pressed the earth with the golden seal, and bored it
with the poniard, speaking thus: 'O Spenta Armaiti, kindly)
open asunder and stretch thyself afar, to bear
flocks and herds and men.'

15. And Yima made the earth grow larger by two-thirds than it
was before, and there came flocks and herds and men, at their
will and wish, as many as he wished.

16. Thus, under the sway of Yima, nine
hundred winters passed away
, and the earth was
replenished with flocks and herds, with men and
dogs and birds and with red blazing fires, and there was
room no more for flocks, herds, and men.

10. Yima, according to
Yt9.10
, made immortality reign on the
earth for a thousand years. The remaining century was spent in
the Vara ('for a hundred years, Jim was in the Var,' says the

Gr. Bund.
) On Yima's fall, see
Yt19.34
;
see
Yt5.25-31
.

17. And I warned the fair Yima, saying: 'O fair Yima, son of Vivanghat,
the earth has become full of flocks and herds, of men and dogs
and birds and of red blazing fires, and there is room no more
for flocks, herds, and men.'

18. Then Yima stepped forward, in light, southwards, on the way
of the sun, and (afterwards) he pressed the earth with the golden
seal, and bored it with the poniard, speaking thus: 'O Spenta
Armaiti, kindly) open asunder and stretch thyself afar, to bear
flocks and herds and men.'

19. And Yima made the earth grow larger
by two-thirds than it was before, and there came

flocks and herds and men, at their will and wish,
as many as he wished.

II.

20. The Maker, Ahura Mazda, called together a meeting of the celestial
Yazatas in the Airyana Vaejo of high renown, by the Vanguhi Daitya
.

The fair Yima, the good shepherd, called together
a meeting of the best of the mortals
, in the Airyana
Vaejo of high renown, by the Vanguhi Daitya.

11. See
Vd1, notes to verse 2
.

12. The best types of mankind, chosen to live in the Var during
the Malkôshân and repeople the earth when the Var opens.

21. To that meeting came Ahura Mazda, in the Airyana Vaejo of
high renown, by the Vanguhi Daitya; he came together with the
celestial Yazatas.

To that meeting came the fair Yima, the good shepherd, in the
Airyana Vaejo of high renown, by the Vanguhi Daitya; he came together
with the best of the mortals.

22. And Ahura Mazda spake unto Yima, saying:
'O fair Yima, son of Vivanghat! Upon the material
world the evil winters are about to fall, that shall
bring the fierce, deadly frost; upon the material
world the evil winters
are about to fall, that shall

make snow-flakes fall thick, even an aredvi deep on
the highest tops of mountains
.

13. The Commentary has here Malkosan, a word wrongly identified
with the Hebrew Malqôsh, which designates the beneficent autumn
rains. Malkosan are the winters let loose by a demon or wizard
named Malkôsh, in Avestan Mahrkûsha 'the death-causing'
(see Westergaard's Fragments, VIII).

14. 'Even where it (the snow) is least, it will be
one Vitasti two fingers deep' (Comm.); that is, fourteen fingers
deep.

23. 'And the beasts that live in the wilderness
, and those
that live on the tops of the mountains
, and those that live
in the bosom of the dale
shall take shelter in underground
abodes.

15. The Comm. has, strangely enough, 'for instance,
Ispahan.'

16. 'For instance, Aparsen (the Upairisaena or Hindu-Kush).'

17. 'For instance, Khorastan (the plain of Khorasan).'

24. 'Before that winter, the country would bear plenty of grass
for cattle, before the waters had flooded it. Now after the melting
of the snow, O Yima, a place wherein the footprint of a sheep
may be seen will be a wonder in the world.

25. 'Therefore make thee a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every
side of the square
, and thither bring the seeds of sheep and
oxen, of men, of dogs, of birds, and of red blazing fires
. Therefore
make thee a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side of the
square, to be an abode for man; a Vara, long as a riding-ground
on every side of the square, for oxen and sheep.

18 'Two hathras long on every side' (Comm.) A hathra
is about an English mile.

19. That is to say, specimens of each species.

26. 'There thou shalt make waters flow in a bed a hathra long;
there thou shalt settle birds, on the green that never fades,
with food that never fails. There thou shalt establish dwelling-places,
consisting of a house with a balcony, a courtyard, and as gallery
.

20. The last three words are
apax legomena
of doubtful meaning.

27. 'Thither thou shalt bring the seeds of men and women, of the
greatest, best, and finest on this earth
; thither thou shalt bring
the seeds of every kind of cattle, of the greatest, best, and
finest on this earth.

21. The best specimens of mankind, to be the origin of the more
perfect races of the latter days.

28. 'Thither thou shalt bring the seeds of every kind of tree,
of the highest of size and sweetest of odour on this earth
;
thither thou shalt bring the seeds of every kind of fruit, the
best of savour and sweetest of odour
. All those seeds shalt
thou bring, two of every kind, to be kept inexhaustible there,
so long as those men shall stay in the Vara.

22. 'The highest of size, like the cypress and the
plane-tree; the sweetest of odour, like the rose and the jessamine'
(Comm.)

23. 'The best of savour, like the date; the sweetest
of odour, like the citron' (Comm.)

29. 'There shall be no humpbacked, none
bulged forward there; no impotent, no lunatic;
no malicious, no liar; no one spiteful, none jealous; no one with
decayed tooth, no leprous to be pent up
, nor any of the brands
wherewith Angra Mainyu stamps the bodies of mortals
.

24. 'A man, afflicted with leprosy, is not allowed to enter a town
and mix with the other Persians'
(Herod. I, 139); he was supposed
to have sinned against the sun). Ctesias has a tale or how Megabyzes
escaped his enemies by simulating leprosy.

25. In order that the new mankind may be exempt from all moral and
physical deformities.

30. 'In the largest part of the place thou
shalt make nine streets, six in the middle part, three
in the smallest. To the streets of the largest part
thou shalt bring a thousand seeds of men and
women; to the streets of the middle part, six hundred;

to the streets of the smallest part, three
hundred
. That Vara thou shalt
seal up with thy golden seal, and thou shalt make a door, and
a window self-shining within.'

26. This division of the Var into three quarters very likely answers
the distinction of the three classes.

31. Then Yima said within himself: 'How shall I manage to make
that Vara which Ahura Mazda has commanded me to make?' And Ahura
Mazda said unto Yima: 'O fair Yima, son of Vivanghat! Crush the
earth with a stamp of thy heel, and then knead it with thy hands,
as the potter does when kneading the potter's clay
.'

27. In the
Shah Namah
Jamshid teaches the Divs to make and
knead clay 'by mixing the earth with water;' and they build palaces
at his bidding. It was his renown, both as a wise king and a great
builder, that caused the Moslems to identify him with Solomon.

32. [And Yima did as Ahura Mazda wished; he crushed the earth
with a stamp of his heel, he kneaded it with his hands, as the
potter does when kneading the potter's clay.
]

28. From the Vendidad Sada.

33. And Yima made a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side
of the square. There he brought the seeds of sheep and oxen, of
men, of dogs, of birds, and of red blazing fires. He made a Vara,
long as a riding-ground on every side of the square, to be an
abode for men; a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side of
the square, for oxen and sheep.

34. There he made waters flow in a bed
a hathra long; there he settled birds, on the green
that never fades, with food that never fails. There

he established dwelling-places, consisting of a house
with a balcony, a courtyard, and a gallery.

35. There he brought the seeds of men and women, of the greatest,
best, and finest on this earth; there he brought the seeds of
every kind of cattle, of the greatest, best, and finest on this
earth.

36. There he brought the seeds of every kind of tree, of the highest
of size and sweetest of odour on this earth; there he brought
the seeds of every kind of fruit, the best of savour and sweetest
of odour. All those seeds he brought, two of every kind, to be
kept inexhaustible there, so long as those men shall stay in the
Vara.

37. And there were no humpbacked, none bulged forward there; no
impotent, no lunatic; no one malicious, no liar; no one spiteful,
none jealous; no one with decayed tooth, no leprous to be pent
up, nor any of the brands wherewith Angra Mainyu stamps the bodies
of mortals.

38. In the largest part of the place he made nine streets, six
in the middle part, three in the smallest. To the streets of the
largest part he brought a thousand seeds of men and women; to
the streets of the middle part, six hundred; to the streets of
the smallest part, three hundred. That Vara he sealed up with
the golden ring, and he made a door, and a window self-shining
within.

39. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What are the
lights that give light in the Vara which Yima made?

40. Ahura Mazda answered: 'There are
uncreated lights and created lights
. The one

thing missed there is the sight of the stars,
the moon, and the sun
, and a year seems only as a day
.

29. The endless light, which is eternal, and artificial lights.
The Commentary has here the following Avestan
quotation: 'The uncreated light shines from above; all the created
lights shine from below.'

30. The people in the Var cannot see them, since the Var is underground.
That is why the Var has lights of its own.

31. As there is no daily revolution of the sun.

41. 'Every fortieth year, to every couple
two are born, a male and a female
. And thus it
is for every sort of cattle. And the men in the
Vara which Yima made live the happiest life
.'

32. See the description of Eranwej according to a later source,
the
Mainyo-i-khard
(as translated by West);
'Ohrmazd created Eranwej better than the remaining places and
districts; and its goodness was this, that men's life is three
hundred years; and cattle and sheep, one hundred and fifty years;
and their pain and sickness are little, and they do not circulate
falsehood, and they make no lamentation and weeping; and the
sovereignty of the demon of Avarice, in their body, is little,
and in ten men, if they eat one loaf, they are satisfied; and in
every forty years, from one woman and one man, one child is born;
and their law is goodness, and religion the primeval religion, and
when they die, they are righteous (= blessed); and their chief is
Gopatshah, and the ruler and king is Srosh' (44.24).

33. 'They live there for 150 years; some say, they
never die' (Comm.)

42. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is he who
brought the Religion of Mazda into the Vara which Yima made? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'It was the bird Karshipta
, O holy Zarathushtra!'

34. 'The bird Karshipta dwells in the heavens: were he living on
the earth, he would be the king of birds. He brought the Religion
into the Var of Vima, and recites the
Avesta
in the language of
birds' (
Bund. 19
and

Bund. 24
).
The Comm. identifies the Karshiptan with the Chakhravak, that is the
Chakravaka of poetical reputation in India.

43. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who are the
Lord and the Master there? Ahura Mazda answered: 'Urvatat-nara
,
O Zarathushtra! and thyself, Zarathushtra.'

35. Zarathushtra had three sons during his lifetime, Isat-vastra,
Hvare-chithra, and Urvatat-nara, who were respectively the fathers
and chiefs of the three classes, priests, warriors, and husbandmen.
Urvatat-nara, as a husbandman, was chosen to be the
ahu
or temporal
Lord of the Var, on account of the Var being underground. Zarathushtra,
as a heavenly priest, was, by right, the
ratu
or Spiritual Lord
in Airyana Vaejah, where he founded the Religion by a sacrifice
(
Bund. 33
and Introd. III, 15).

vd2sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 3
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd3sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd3sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 3. the Earth

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.

"Les Guèbres," says Chardin (ed. Langlês, VIII, 358), "regardent
l'agriculture,non seulement comme une profession belle et innocente,
mais aussi comme méritoire et noble, et ils croient que c'est la
première de toutes les vocations, celle pour quoi le Dieu souverain
et les dieux inférieurs, comme ils parlent, ont le plus de complaisance
et qu'ils recompensent le plus largement. Cette opinion, tournée
en créance parmi eux, fait qu'ils se portent naturellement à travailler
à la terre et qu'ils s'y exercent le plus: leurs prêtres leur enseignent
que la plus vertueuse activité est d'engendrer des enfants
(cf.
Farg. IV, 47
) et aprés de cultiver
une terre qui serait en friche (cf. infra,
§ 4), de planter un arbre soit fruitier, soit autre."

The classical writers (Xenophon, Oeconomica, IV, 4 seq.; Polybius,
X, 28, quoted § 4, note) express themselves to the same effect,
and their testimony has been lately corroborated, in a most unexpected
way, by a Greek inscription
(discovered at Deremendjik, near Magnesia, on the Maeander:
by Cousin and Deschamps,
Bullein de Correspondance hellénique
,
XIII: 529), emanating from no less an authority
than King Darius himself, who congratulates his satrap in Asia
Minor, Gadates, "for working well the King's earth and transplanting
in lower Asia the fruits of the country beyond

Euphrates.

The third Fargard may serve as a Commentary to those texts. The
principal subject is, as the
Denkard

has it:

What comforts most the Genius of the Earth (§§ 1-6)?

What discomforts most the Genius of the Earth (§§ 7-11)?

What rejoices the Earth most (§§ 12-35)?

In each of these three developments a series of five objects is
considered. Series I and II, though expressed in symmetrical
terms, do not answer one another: there is greater symmetry,
as to the ideas, between the second series and the third. Series
I and II are a dry enumeration. The third series contains two
interesting digressions, one on the funeral laws (§§ 14-21),
and the other on the sanctity of husbandry (§§ 24-33).

The Fargard ends with a development forbidding the burial of the
dead (§§ 36-42); it is a sort of commentary to §
8.

The subject of this chapter has become a commonplace topic with
the Parsis, who have treated it more or less antithetically in
the
Mainyai-khard
(chaps. 5 and 6)
and in
the
Rivayats
[ch. 98] (Gr. Riv. pp. 434-437).

FARGARD 3. The Earth

I.

1. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy
one! Which is the first place where the Earth

feels most happy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place whereon
one of the faithful steps forward, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
with the log in his hand
, the Baresma
in
his hand, the milk
in his hand, the mortar
in his

hand, lifting up his voice in good accord with religion,
and beseeching Mithra
, the lord of the rolling
country-side, and Rama Hvastra
.'

Notes:

1. 'The Genius of the Earth' (Comm.)

2. The wood for the fire altar.

3. The
Baresma (now called barsom)
is a bundle of sacred
twigs which the priest holds in his hand while reciting the
prayers. (See
Vd19.18 seq. and notes
.)

4. The so-called jîv or jîvâm, one of the elements of the
Haoma sacrifice.

5. The Havana [hawan] or mortar used in crushing the Haoma or
Hom.

6. Mithra, the Persian Apollo, sometimes like him identified with
the Sun, is invoked here as making the earth fertile. 'Why do not
you worship the Sun? King Yazdgard asked the Christians. Is he
not the god who lights up with his rays all the world, and through
whose warmth the food of men and cattle grows ripe?' (Elisaeus.)

7. The god that gives food its savour: he is an acolyte to
Mithra.

2,3. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
second place where the Earth feels most happy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place whereon one of the faithful erects a house with
a priest within
, with cattle, with a wife, with children, and
good herds within; and wherein afterwards the cattle continue
to thrive, virtue to thrive
, fodder to thrive, the dog to thrive,
the wife to thrive, the child to thrive, the fire to thrive, and
every blessing of life to thrive.'

8. With the domestic chaplain (the Panthaki).

9. By the performance of worship.

4. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
third place where the Earth feels most happy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place where one of the faithful sows most corn, grass,
and fruit, O Spitama Zarathushtra! where he waters ground that
is dry, or drains ground that is too wet
.'

10. Under the Achaemanian kings countrymen who brought water to
places naturally dry received the usufruct of the ground for five
generations (Polybius, X, 28). But for those underground canals
(called qanats), which bring water from the mountains all through
the Iranian desert, Persia would starve.

5. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
fourth place where the Earth feels most happy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place where there is most increase of flocks and herds.'

6. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
fifth place where the Earth feels most happy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place where flocks and herds yield most dung.'

II.

7. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
first place where the Earth feels sorest grief? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the neck of Arezura
, whereon the hosts of fiends rush forth
from the burrow of the Druj
.'

11. The neck of Arezura (Arezurahe griva) is "a mount at the gate
of hell, whence the demons rush forth"
(
Bund.
12.8

Dadistan 33.5
); it is also
called "the head of Arezura" (
Vd19.45
),
or 'the back of Arezura' (
Bund. 12.2
).
Arezura was a fiend, son of Ahriman, who was killed by the first
man, Gayomard (
Menog-i Khrad 27.15
). The
mount named from him hes in the North (which is the seat of the demons):
it seems to belong to the Alborz chain, like the Damavand
(
Bund. 12.8
), where
Azi Dahaka [Zohak] was bound (
Vd1.18, notes
).

12. Hell, the Druj being assimilated to a burrowing Khrafstra.
See
Vd7.24
.

8. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
second place where the Earth feels sorest grief? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place wherein most corpses of dogs and of men lie buried
.'

13. 'It is declared in the good religion, that, when they conceal
a corpse beneath the ground, Spendarmad, the archangel, shudders;
it is just as severe as a serpent or scorpion would be to any
one in a sleeping-garment, and it is also just like that to the
ground. When thou makest a corpse beneath the ground as it were
apparent, thou makest the ground liberated ftom that affliction'
(
Saddar 33
, tr. by West, in
the
, XXIV).
See
Vd. 6.51
;

Vd7.45
.

9. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
third place where the Earth feels sorest grief? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place whereon stand most of those Dakhmas on which
the corpses of men are deposited
.'

14. With regard to Dakhmas, see
Vd6.45.

'Nor is the Earth happy at that place whereon stands a Dakhma with corpses upon
it; for that patch of ground will never be clean again till the
day of resurrection' (
Gr. Riv.
435, 437). Although the erection of
Dakhmas is enjoined by the law, yet the Dakhma in itself is as
unclean as any spot on the earth can be, since it is always in
contact with the dead see (
Vd7.55
).
The impurity which would otherwise be scattered over the whole world,
is thus brought together to one and the same spot. Yet even that spot, in spite
of the Rivayat, is not to lie defiled for ever, as every fifty
years the Dakhmas ought to be pulled down, so that their sites
may be restored to their natural purity (see

Vd7.49 ff.
and this Farg. verse 13).

10. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
fourth place where the Earth feels sorest grief? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place wherein are most burrows of the creatures of
Angra Mainyu
.

15. 'Where there are most Khrafstras' (noxious animals).

11. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Which is the
fifth place where the Earth feels sorest grief? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is the place whereon

the wife and children of one of the faithful
,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! are driven along the way of captivity,
the dry, the dusty way, and lift up a voice of wailing.'

16. Killed by an enemy.

III.

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Who is the first
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is he who digs out of it most corpses of dogs and men
.'

17. This joy answers the second grief of the earth (§ 8; cf.
note). There is no counterpart given to the first grief (§
7), because, as the Commentary naively expresses it, "it is not
possible now so to dig out hell," which will be done at the end
of the world (
Bund. 30.32
).

13. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Who is the second
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is he who pulls down most of those Dakhmas on which the corpses
of men are deposited
.'

18. This answers the third grief (§ 9; cf. note).

14. Let no man alone by himself
carry a corpse
.
If a man alone by himself carry a corpse,

the Nasu
rushes upon him, to defile
him, from the nose of the dead, from the eye, from the tongue,
from the jaws, from the sexual organs, from the hinder parts.
This Druj Nasu falls upon him, [stains him] even to the end of
the nails, and he is unclean, thenceforth, for ever and ever.

19. No ceremony in general can be performed by one man alone. Two
Mobeds are wanted to perform the Vendidad service, two priests
for the Barashnum, two persons for the Sag-did (Anquetil, II,
584 n.) It is never good that the faithful should be alone, as
the fiend is always lurking about, ready to take advantage of
any moment of inattention. If the faithful be alone, there is
no one to make up for any negligence and to prevent mischief arising
from it. Never is the danger greater than in the present case,
when the fiend is close at hand, and in direct contact with the
faithful.

20. A corpse from which the Nasu has not been expelled by the Sag-did
ceremony (described
Vd8.14-22
).

21. The word Nasu has two meanings: it means either the corpse (nasai),
or the corpse-demon (the Druj Nasu, that is to say the demon who
takes possession of the dead body and makes his presence felt
by the decomposition of the body and infection).

15. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! What shall be
the place of that man who has carried a corpse [alone]
? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'It shall be the place on this earth wherein is
least water and fewest plants, whereof the ground is the cleanest
and the dryest and the least passed through by flocks and herds,
by the fire of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of Baresma,
and by the faithful
.'

22. He cannot purify himself like the Nasa-salar
(
Vd8.13
).
'He who carries a man, knowing that the man is dead and that the
Sag-did has not been performed, commits a sin worthy of death
(margarzan).' As the absence of Sag-did makes the infection
worse, it is the same crime as if a man were to introduce a plague
into the country.

23. To avoid any contact of that man with pure beings.

16. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! How far from
the fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated
bundles of Baresma? How far from the faithful?

17. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty paces
from the fire, thirty
paces from the water, thirty paces from the consecrated bundles
of Baresma, three paces from the faithful.

24. A pace (gâma) is as much as three feet (pâdha;

Vd9.8
).

18,19. 'There, on that place, shall the worshippers of Mazda erect
an enclosure
, and therein shall they establish him with food,
therein shall they establish him with clothes, with the coarsest
food and with the most worn-out clothes. That food he shall live
on, those clothes he shall wear, and thus shall they let him live,
until he has grown to the age of a Hana, or of a Zaurura, or of
a Pairishta-khshudra
.

25. The Armesht-gâh, the place for the unclean; see Introd. V, 15.

26. Hana means, literally, 'an old man;' Zaurura, 'a man broken
down by age;' Pairishta-khshudra, 'one whose seed is dried up.'
These words have acquired the technical meanings of 'fifty, sixty,
and seventy years old.'

20,21. 'And when he has grown to the age of a Hana, or of a Zaurura
,
or of a Pairishta-khshudra, then the worshippers of Mazda shall
order a man strong, vigorous, and skilful
, to cut the head
off his neck
, in his enclosure on the top of the mountain: and
they shall deliver his corpse unto the greediest of the corpse-eating
creatures made by the beneficent Spirit, unto the vultures, with
these words: "The man here has repented of all his evil thoughts,
words, and deeds. If he has committed any other evil deed, it
is remitted by his repentance
: if he has committed no other evil
deed, he is absolved by his repentance, for ever and ever."'

27. When he is near his death. The carrier alone (êvak-bar), being
margarzân (see note 22 above), ought to have been put to death
at once. The rigour of theory was abated in practice and delayed
to the moment when the guilty man was to have paid to nature the
debt due to religion.

28. 'Trained to operations of that sort' (Comm.); a headsman.

29. Perhaps: 'to flay him alive and cut off his head.'
See
Vd9.49, text and note
.

30. By the performance or the Patet.

22. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Who is the third
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is he who fills up most burrows of the creatures of Angra
Mainyu
.'

31. This joy answers the fourth grief or the earth (§ 10).

23. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Who is the fourth
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy? Ahura Mazda answered:
'It is he who sows most corn, grass, and fruit, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
who waters ground that is dry, or drains ground that is too wet
.

32. This is identical with § 4, which is developed in the
following clauses (§§ 24-34).

24. 'Unhappy is the land that has long lain unsown with the seed
of the sower and wants a good husbandman, like a well-shapen maiden
who has long gone childless and wants a good husband.

25. 'He who would till the earth, O Spitama Zarathushtra! with
the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left, unto
him will she bring forth plenty of fruit: even as it were a lover
sleeping with his bride on her bed; the bride will bring forth
children, (the earth will bring forth) plenty of fruit
.

33. The text has: 'she brings either a son or plenty of fruit,' she
being either the woman or the earth.

26,27. 'He who would till the earth, O Spitama Zarathushtra! with
the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left, unto
him thus says the Earth: "O thou man! who dost till me with
the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left, here
shall I ever go on bearing, bringing

forth all manner of food, bringing corn first to thee
."

34. 'When something good grows up, it will grow up
for thee first' (Comm.) Perhaps: 'bringing to thee profusion of
corn' ('some say, she will bring to thee 15 for 10;' Comm.)

28,29. 'He who does not till the earth, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
with the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left,
unto him thus says the Earth: "O thou man! who dost not till
me with the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the
left, ever shalt thou stand at the door of the stranger, among
those who beg for bread; the refuse and the crumbs of the bread
are brought unto thee
, brought by those who have profusion
of wealth."'

35. 'They take for themselves what is good and send
to thee what is bad' (Comm.)

30. O Maker of the material world, thou
Holy one! What is the food that fills the Religion
of Mazda
? Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is sowing corn again
and again, O Spitama Zarathushtra!

36. Literally, 'what is the stomach of the law?'

31. 'He who sows corn, sows righteousness: he makes the Religion
of Mazda walk, he suckles the Religion of Mazda; as well as he
could do with a hundred man's feet, with a thousand woman's breasts
,
with ten thousand sacrificial formulas
.

37. 'He makes the Religion of Mazda as fat as a child
could be made by means of a hundred feet, that is to say, of fifty
servants walking to rock him; of a thousand breasts, that is,
of five hundred nurses' (Comm.)

38. With the recitation of 10,000
Yenghe hatam
,
that is to say, as if one had performed for his weal as many sacrifices as contain
10,000 Yenghe hatam.

32. 'When barley was created, the Daevas

started up
; when it grew
, then fainted the Daevas'
hearts; when the knots came
, the Daevas groaned;
when the ear came, the Daevas flew away
. In that
house the Daevas stay, wherein wheat perishes
. It is
as though red hot iron were turned about in their throats, when
there is plenty of corn
.

39. John Barleycorn got up again / And sore surpris'd them all.

40. Doubtful.

41. Doubtful.

42. The general meaning of the sentence is how the Devs are broken
down 'by the growing, the increasing, and the ripening of the
corn' (
Denkard
, 1.1. § 10

[Dk8 44.10]).

43. Doubtful.

44. Doubtful. Wolff: "When the grain is rightly placed (for threshing),
then the Daevas perspire (with fear);. when the mill is rightly placed (to grind the
grain), then lose the Daevas lose their composure, if the flour is rightly placed (for
making dough), then the Daevas cry, if the dough is rightly placed (for baking), then
the Daevas perish (Av. paredhen; Wolff follows AirWb 869 in reading farzen) (with fear); kept
permanently in the house, flour dough is effectual for striking down the
Daevas, in the mouth, it is very hot (to them) ? you see them turn to
flee. Thus grain grows abundantly, so one should recite the Mãthra..."

33. 'Then let people learn by heart this holy
saying [manthra -JHP]: "No one who does not eat, has strength to
do heavy works of holiness
, strength to
do works of husbandry, strength to beget children.
By eating every material creature lives, by not eating it dies
away."'

45. 'Like the performance of the dvâzda hômâst'
(the longest and most cumbersome of all Zoroastrian ceremonies).

34. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! Who is the fifth
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy?

Ahura Mazda answered: '[It is he who kindly and piously gives

to one of the faithful who tills the earth,] O Spitama Zarathushtra!

46. The Asho-dad or alms. The bracketed clause is from the Vendidad Sada.

35. 'He who would not kindly and piously
give to one of the faithful who tills the earth, O
Spitama Zarathushtra! Spenta Armaiti
will
throw him down into darkness, down into the world of woe, the
world of hell, down into the deep abyss
.'

47. The Genius of the Earth offended.

48. Conjectural translation.

IV.

36. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! If a man shall
bury in the earth either the corpse of a dog or the corpse of
a man, and if he shall not disinter it within half a year, what
is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Five hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra
,
five hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

49. See Introduction.

37. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! If a man shall
bury in the earth either the corpse of a dog or the corpse of
a man, and if he shall not disinter it within a year, what is
the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
a thousand stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

38. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy one! If a man shall
bury in the earth either the corpse of a dog or the corpse of
a man, and if he shall not disinter it within the second year,
what is the penalty for it? What is the atonement for it? What
is the cleansing from it?

39. Ahura Mazda answered: 'For that deed there is nothing that
can pay, nothing that can atone, nothing that can cleanse from
it; it is a trespass for which there is no atonement, for ever
and ever.'

40. When is it so?

'It is so, if the sinner be a professor of the

Religion of Mazda, or one who has been taught
in it
.

'But if he be not a professor of the Religion of Mazda, nor one
who has been taught in it
, then his sin is taken from him, if
he makes confession of the Religion of Mazda and resolves never
to commit again such forbidden deeds
.

50. A born Zoroastrian or a catechist: in both cases, he must have
known that he was committing sin.

51. He did not know that he was committing sin.

52. He makes Patet and says to himself; 'I will never henceforth
sin again' (Comm.)

41. 'The Religion of Mazda indeed, O
Spitama Zarathushtra! takes away from him who
makes confession of it the bonds of his sin
; it takes
away (the sin of) breach of trust
; it takes away (the
sin of) murdering one of the faithful
; it takes away
(the sin of) burying a corpse
; it takes away (the
sin of) deeds for which there is no atonement; it
takes away the worst sin of usury
; it takes away
any sin that may be sinned.

53. If not knowingly committed; see § 40 and the following notes.

54. Doubtful. From the commentary it appears that
draosha must have meant a different sort of robbery: 'He knows
that it is forbidden to steal, but he fancies that robbing the
rich to give to the poor is a pious deed' (Comm.)

55. Or better, 'a Mazdean,' but one who has committed a capital crime;
'he knows that it is allowed to kill the margarzân, but he
does not know that it is not allowed to do so without an order
from the judge.' See
Vd8.74 note
.

56. 'He knows that it is forbidden to bury a corpse; but he fancies
that if one manages so that dogs or foxes may not take it to the
fire and to the water, he behaves piously (Comm.) -- He fancies that
the prohibition of burying the dead is meant only for the protection
of the fire and the water, not of the earth herself.

57. Or, possibly, 'the sin of usury.' 'He knows that it is lawful
to take high interest, but he does not know that it is not lawful
to do so from the faithful' (Comm.)

42. 'In the same way the Religion of Mazda, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
cleanses the faithful from every evil thought, word, and deed,
as a swift-rushing mighty wind cleanses the plain
.

'So let all the deeds he doeth be henceforth good, O Zarathushtra!
a full atonement for his sin is effected by means of the Religion
of Mazda.'

58. 'From chaff' (Comm.)

vd3sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 4
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd4sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd4sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 4. Contracts and offenses.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.

This Fargard is the only one in the
Vendidad
that deals strictly
with legal objects.

I a. Classification of the contracts according to the value of
their object (§ 2). -- A contract is cancelled by paying the amount
of the contract higher by one degree (§ 3-4).

Religious responsibility of the family for the breach of a contract
by one of its members (§§ 5-10).

Punishment of the Mihr-Druj (one who breaks a contract), (§§ 11-16).

II a. Definition of the outrages known as agerepta (threatening
attitude), avaoirishta (assault), aredush (blows), (§ 17).

Penalties for menaces -- (§§ 18-21); for assaults (§§ 22-25);
for blows (§ 26-29); for wounds (§§ 30-33); for wounds causing
blood to flow (§§ 34-36); for broken bones (§§
37-39); for manslaughter (§§ 40-43).

III a. Contract of charity to co-religionists (§§ 44-45).

IV a. Heinousness of false oath (§ 46).

III b. Dignity of wealth; of marriage; of physical weal(§§ 47-49a).

IV b. Heinousness of false oath. Ordeal (§§ 49b-55).

Part of this Fargard has been made unduly obscure by the transposition
of § 46) wrongly inserted between the clause on charity
(§§ 44-45) and the corresponding development on the dignity
of material goods. This transposition is found in all known manuscripts
and belonged to the older text from which they are derived.

FARGARD 4. Contracts and offenses

I.

Notes:

1. He that does not restore a loan to the man who lent it, steals
the thing and robs the man
.
This he doeth every day, every night, as long as he keep in his
house his neighbour's property, as though it were his own
.

1. He is a thief when he takes a view not to restore; he is
a robber when, being asked to restore, he answers, I will not"
(Comm.)

2. Every moment that he holds it unlawfully, he steals it anew.
'The basest thing with Persians is to lie; the next to it is to
be in debt, for this reason among many others, that he who is
so, must needs sink to lying at last'
(Herod. I, 139) The debtor
in question is of course the debtor of bad faith, 'he who says
to a man, Give me this, I will restore it to thee at the proper
time, and he says to himself; I will not restore it' (Comm.)

Ia.

2. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy
One! How many in number are thy contracts, O
Ahura Mazda?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'They are six in number,
O holy Zarathushtra
. The first is the word-contract
;
the second is the hand-contract
;
the third is the contract to the amount of a sheep
; the

fourth is the contract to the amount of an ox
; the
fifth is the contract to the amount of a man [person]
; the
sixth is the contract to the amount of a field
, a field
in good land, a fruitful one, in good bearing
.'

3. At first view it seems as if the classification were twofold,
the contracts being defined in the first two clauses by their
mode of being entered into, and in the last four by their amount.
Yet it appears from the following clauses that even the word-contract
and the hand-contract are indicative of a certain amount, which,
however, the commentators did not, or were unable to, determine.

4. The word-contract may be a contract of which the object are
words: the contract of jâdangôi (ukhdhô-vachah), by which one
offers to speak and intervene for some one's benefit, or the contract
between master and pupil (for teaching the sacred texts).

5. The contract for hiring labour (?).

6. 'Viz. to the amount of 3 istîrs [in weight],' (Comm.) An istîr
(
stathr
) is as much as 4 dirhems
(
dracmh
).

7. 'To the amount of 12 istîrs (=48 dirhems),' (Comm.)

8. 'To the amount of 500 dirhems.' The exact translation would
be rather, 'The contract to the amount of a human being' (promise
of marriage).

9. 'Upwards of 500 istîrs.'

10. A sort of gloss added to define more accurately the value of
the object, and to indicate that it is greater than that of the
preceding one.

3. The word-contract is fulfilled by words of mouth. It is cancelled
by the hand-contracct; he shall give as damages the amount of
the hand-contract.

4. The hand-contract is cancelled by the sheep-contract; he shall
give as damages the amount of the sheep-contract. The sheep-contract
is cancelled by the ox-contract; he shall give as damages the
amount of the ox-contract. The ox-contract is cancelled by the
man-contract; he shall give as damages the amount of the man-contract.
The man-contract is cancelled by the field-contract; he shall
give as damages the amount of the field-contract.

5. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the word-contract, how many are involved in his sin
?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His sin makes his
Nabanazdishtas
answerable for three hundred
(years)
.'

11. Literally, how much is involved? The joint responsibility of
the family was a principle in the Persian law: 'Leges apud eos
impendio formidatae, et abominandae aliae, per quas ob noxam unius
omnis propinquitas perit' (Am. Marcellinus XXIII, 6).

12. The next of kin to the ninth degree.

13. See § 11. This passage seems to have puzzled tradition.
The Commentary says, 'How long, how many years, has one to fear
for the breach of a word-contract? -- the Nabanazdishtas have to
fear for three hundred years;' but it does not explain farther
the nature of that fear; it only tries to reduce the circle of
that liability to narrower limits: 'only the son born after the
breach is liable for it; the righteous are not liable for it;
when the father dies, the son, if righteous, has nothing to fear
from it.' And finally, the
Rivayats
leave the kinsmen wholly aside;
the penalty falling entirely upon the real offender, and the number
denoting only the duration of his punishment in hell: 'He who
breaks a word-contract, his soul shall abide for three hundred
years in hell' (
Gr. Riv.
94).

6. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy
One! If a man break the hand-contract, how many
are involved in his sin?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'His sin makes his
Nabanazdishtas answerable for six hundred (years)
.'

14. See § 12. 'His soul shall abide for six hundred years
in hell' (
Gr. Riv.
1.1.)

7. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy
One! If a man break the sheep-contract, how many
are involved in his sin?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'His sin makes his Nabanazdishtas
answerable for seven hundred (years)
.'

15. See § 13. 'His soul shall abide for seven hundred years
in hell' (
Gr. Riv.
1.1.)

8. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy
One! If a man break the ox-contract, how many
are involved in his sin?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'His sin makes his Nabanazdishtas
answerable for eight hundred (years)
.'

16. See § 14. 'His soul shall abide for eight hundred years
in hell.'

9. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the man-contract, how many are involved in his sin? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'His sin makes his Nabanazdishtas answerable for nine
hundred (years)
.'

16. See § 15. 'His soul shall abide for nine hundred years in hell.'

10. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the field-contract, how many are involved in his sin? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'His sin makes his Nabanazdishtas answerable for a thousand
(years)
.'

17. See § 16. 'His soul shall abide for a thousand years in
hell.'

11. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the word-contract, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Three hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
three hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

18. One tanapuhr and a half, that is 1800 dirhems. See Introd.

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the hand-contract, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Six hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, six
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

19. Three tanapuhrs, or 3600 dirhems.

13. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the sheep-contract, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Seven hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
seven hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

20. Three tanapuhrs and a half or 4200 dirhems.

14. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the ox-contract, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Eight hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
eight hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

21. Four tanapuhrs, or 4800 dirhems.

15. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the man-contract, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Nine hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
Nine hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

22. Four tanapuhrs and a half, or 5400 dirhems.

16. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man break
the field-contract, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, a
thousand stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

23. Five tanapuhrs, or 6000 dirhems.

IIa.

17. If a man rise up with a weapon in his
hand, it is an Agerepta
. If he brandish it, it is

an Avaoirishta. If he actually smite
a man with malicious aforethought, it is an Aredush. Upon the
fifth Aredush
he becomes a Peshotanu
.

24. In this paragraph are defined the first three of the eight outrages
with which the rest of the Fargard deals. Only these three are
defined, because they are designated by technical terms. We subjoin
the definitions of them found in a Sanskrit translation of a Patet
(Paris, Bibl. Nat. f. B. 5, 154), in which their etymological
meanings are better preserved than in the Zend definition itself:--

Agerepta, 'seizing,' is when a man seizes a weapon with a view to smite
another.

Avaoirishta, 'brandishing,' is when a man brandishes, a weapon
with a view to smite another.

Aredush is when a man actually smites another with a weapon,
but without wounding him, or inflicts a wound which is healed
within three days.

25. Viz. on the sixth commission of it, as appears from § 28.

26. He shall receive two hundred stripes, or shall pay 1200 dirhems
(see Introd.)

18. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! He that committeth
an Agerepta, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered:
'Five stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, five stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the second Agerepta, ten stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ten
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the third, fifteeen stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, fifteen
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

19. 'On the fourth, thirty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, thirty
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the fifth, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, fifty stripes
with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the sixth, sixty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, sixty stripes
with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the seventh, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ninety
stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

20. If a man commit an Agerepta for the eighth time, without having
atoned for the preceding
, what penalty shall he pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

27. Literally, 'without having undone the preceding.'

21. If a man commit an Agerepta
, and refuse
to atone for it
, what penalty shall he pay?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu:
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes
with the Sraosho-charana.'

28. Even though the Agerepta has been committed for the first time.

29. Literally, 'and does not undo it.' If he do's not offer himself
to hear the penalty, and does not perform the Patet (see Introd.)

22. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man commit
an Avaoirishta, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered:
'Ten stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ten stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the second Avaoirishta, fifteen stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
fifteen stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

23. 'On the third, thirty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, thirty
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the fourth, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, fifty stripes
with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the fifth, seventy stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, seventy
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the sixth, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ninety stripes
with the Sraosho-charana.'

24. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man commit
an Avaoirishta for the seventh time, without having atoned for
the preceding, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered:
'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

25. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man commit
an Avaoirishta, and refuse to atone for it, what penalty shall
he pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

26. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man commit
an Aredush, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'Fifteen
stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, fifteen stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

27. 'On the second Aredush, thirty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
thirty stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the third, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, fifty stripes
with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the fourth, seventy stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, seventy
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'On the fifth, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ninety stripes
with the Sraosho-charana;

28. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man commit
an Aredush for the sixth time, without having atoned for the preceding,
what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu:
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes
with the Sraosho-charana.'

29. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man commit
an Aredush, and refuse to atone for it, what penalty shall he
pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

30. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another and hurt him sorely, what is the penalty that he shall
pay?

31. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty stripes

with the Aspahe-ashtra,
thirty stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'The second time, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, fifty
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'The third time, seventy stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, seventy
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'The fourth time, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ninety
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

32. If a man commit that deed for the fifth time, without having
atoned for the preceding, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

33. If a man commit that deed and refuse to atone for it, what
penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu:
two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes
with the Sraosho-charana.'

34. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another so that the blood come, what is the penalty that he shall
pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'Fifty stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
fifty stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'The second time, seventy stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, seventy
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'The third time, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ninety
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

35. If a man commit that deed for the fourth time, without having
atoned for the preceding, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

36. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another so that the blood come, and if he refuse to atone for
it, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a
Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred
stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

37. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another so that he break a bone, what is the penalty that he shall
pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seventy stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
seventy stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

'The second time, ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, ninety
stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

38. If he commit that deed for the third time, without having
atoned for the preceding, what penalty shall he pay? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

39. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another so that he break a bone, and if he refuse to atone for
it, what is the penalty he shall pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'He
is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

40. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another so that he give up the ghost, what is the penalty that
he shall pay? Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ninety stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
seventy stripes with the Sraosho-charana;

41. If he commit that deed again, without having atoned for the
preceding, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

42. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man smite
another so that he give up the ghost, and if he refuse to atone
for it, what is the penalty he shall pay? Ahura Mazda answered:
'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

43. And they shall thenceforth in their doings walk after the
way of holiness, after the word [manthra] of holiness, after the ordinance
of holiness.

IIIa
.

44. If men of the same faith, either friends or brothers, come
to an agreement together, that one may obtain from the other,
either goods
, or a wife
, or knowledge
,
let him who desires goods

have them delivered to him; let him who desires a wife receive
and wed her; let him who desires knowledge be taught the holy
word [manthra spenta],

30. We return here to contracts; the logical place of §§
44-45 would be after § 16.

31. The analysis of the
Vendidad
in the

Denkard
has here: 'a proof that one
professes the Religion well is to grant bountifully to
the brethren in the faith any benefit they may ask for.'

32. Woman is an object of contract, like cattle or fields: she is
disposed of by contracts of the fifth sort, being more valuable
than cattle and less so than fields. She is sold by her father
or her guardian, often from the cradle. 'Instances are not wanting
of the betrothal of a boy of three years of age to a girl of two'
(see Dosabhoy Framjee's work on
The Parsees
, p. 77; cf. 'A Bill
to Define and Amend the Law relating to Succession, Inheritance,
Marriage, &c.,' Bombay, 1864).

33. On the holiness of the contract between pupil and teacher, see

Yt10.116
. Cf. above, p.35, n. 4.

45. during the first part of the day and the last, during the
first part of the night and the last, that his mind may be increased
in intelligence and wax strong in holiness. So shall he sit up,
in devotion and prayers, that he may be increased in intelligence:
he shall rest during the middle part of the day, during the middle
part of the night
, and thus shall he continue until he can say
all the words which former Aethrapaitis
have said.

34. He sleeps 'the third part of the day and the third part of the
night' (
Yasna 62.5
).

35. A teaching priest (Parsi Herbad).

IVa.

46. Before
the boiling water publicly prepared,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! let no one make bold to deny having received
[from his neighbour] the ox or the garment in his possession.

36. This clause is intended against false oaths taken in the so-called
Var-ordeal (see § 54 n.) It ought to be placed before §
49 bis, where the penalty for a false oath is given.

IIIb.

. Verily I say it unto thee, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the man
who has a wife is far above him who lives in continence
; he who
keeps a house is far above him who has none; he who has

children is far above the childless man
; he who has riches is far above
him who has none.

37. §§ 47-49 are a Sort of commentary to the beginning of § 44.

38. What king Yazdgard found most offensive in Christianity was
'that the Christians praise death and despise life, set no value
upon fecundity and extol sterility, so that if their disciples
would listen to them, they would no longer have any intercourse with women and
the world would end' (Elisaeus).

39. 'In Persia there are prizes given by the king to those who have
most children' (Herod. I, 136). , He who has no child, the bridge
(of Paradise) shall be barred to him. The first question the angels
there will ask him is, whether he has left in this world a substitute
for himself; if the answer be, No, they will pass by and he will
stay at the head of the bridge, full of grief and sorrow'
(
Saddar 18
; Hyde 19). The primitive
meaning of this belief is explained by Brahmanical doctrine;
the man without a son falls into hell, because there is nobody
to pay him the family worship.

48. And of two men, he who fills himself with meat receives in
him Vohu Mano
much better than he who does not do so
;
the latter is all but dead; the former is above him by the worth of an
Asperena
, by the worth of a sheep, by the worth of
an ox, by the worth of a man
.

40. Vohu Mano is at the same time the god of good thoughts and the
god of cattle.

41. 'There are people who strive to pass a day without eating, and
who abstain from any meat; we strive too and abstain, namely,
from any sin in deed, thought, or word: ... in other religions,
they fast from bread; in ours, we fast from sin'
(
Saddar 83
). -- '
The Zoroastrians have no fasting at all. He who fasts commits
a sin, and must, by way of expiation, give food to a number of
poor people' (Albiruni,
Chronology
, p. 217).

42. A dirhem.

43. Or: 'is worth an Asperena, worth a sheep, worth an ox, worth
a man,' which means, according to the Commentary: 'deserves the
gift of an Asperena, of a sheep's value, an ox's value, a man's
value.'

49. This man can strive against the onsets
of Asto-vidhotu
; he can strive against the well-darted
arrow; he can strive against the winter

fiend, with thinnest garment on; he can strive against
the wicked tyrant and smite him on the head; he can strive against
the ungodly fasting Ashemaogha
.

44. Asto-vidhotu, the demon of death (
Vd5.8
).
The man who eats well has greater vitality.

45. The Commentary has: 'like Mazdak, son of Bâmdât [Bamdat],'
the communistic heresiarch who flourished under Kobad (488-531)
and was put to death under Noshirvan.

IVb.

49 (bis). On the very first time when that deed
has been done,
without waiting until it is done again,

46. The taking of a false oath. Cf. § 46.

50. down there
the pain for
that deed shall be as hard as any in this world: even as if one
should cut off the limbs from his perishable body with knives
of iron,
or still worse;

47. In hell.

47b. Dar: brass. -JHP

51. down there the pain for that deed shall be as hard as any
in this world: even as if one should nail

his perishable body with nails of iron,
or still worse;

48. Doubtful.

48b. Dar: brass. -JHP

52. down there the pain for that deed shall be as hard as any
in this world: even as if one should by force throw his perishable
body headlong down a precipice a hundred times the height of a
man, or still worse;

53. down there the pain for that deed shall be as hard as any
in this world: even as if one should by force impale

his perishable body, or still worse.

49. Doubtful.

54. Down there the pain for that deed shall
be as hard as any in this world: to wit, the deed of

a man, who knowingly lying, confronts the brimstoned,
golden
, truth-knowing water with an
appeal unto Rashnu
and a lie unto Mithra
.

50. The water before which the oath is taken contains some incense,
brimstone, and one danak of molten gold (
Gr. Riv.
101).

51. The god of truth (
Yt12
). The formula
is as follows: 'Before the Amshaspand Vohuman, before the Amshaspand
Ardwahisht, here lighted up . . . &c., I swear that I have nothing of what
is thine, N. son of N., neither gold, nor silver, nor brass, nor
clothes, nor any of the things created by Ohrmazd' (l.l.96). Cf.
above, § 46.

52. He is a Mithra-druj, 'one who lies to Mithra.'

55. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! He who, knowingly
lying, confronts the brimstoned, golden, truth-knowing water with
an appeal unto Rashnu and a lie unto Mithra, what is the penalty
that he shall pay
? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Seven hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
seven hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

53. In this world.

vd4sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 5
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd5sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd5sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 5. Purity Laws.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

,
American Edition, New York, The Christian Literature Company, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.

This chapter and the following ones, to the end of the twelfth,
deal chiefly with uncleanness arising from the dead, and with
the means of removing it from men and things.

The subjects treated in this Fargard are as follows:--

I (1-7). If a man defile the fire or the earth with dead matter
(Nasu), involuntarily or unconsciously, it is no sin.

II (8-9). Water and fire do not kill.

III (10-14). Disposal of the dead during winter when it is not
possible to take them to the Dakhma.

IV (15-20). Why Ahura, while forbidding man to defile water, sends
water ftom the heavens down to the Dakhmas, covered with corpses.
How he purifies that water.

V (21-26). On the excellence of purity and of the law that shows
how to recover purity, when lost.

VI (27-38). On the defiling power of the Nasu being greater or
less, according to the greater or less dignity of the being that
dies.

VII (39-44). On the management of sacrificial implements [alat] defiled
with Nasu.

VIII (45-62). On the treatment of a woman who has been delivered
of a still-born child; and what is to be done with her clothes.

FARGARD 5. Purity laws

I.

Notes:

1. There dies a man in the depths of the vale: a bird takes flight
from the top of the mountain down into the depths of the vale,
and it feeds on the corpse of the dead man there: then, up it
flies from the depths of the vale to the top of the mountain:
it flies to some one of the trees there, of the hard-wooded or
the soft-wooded, and upon that tree it vomits and deposits dung.

2. Now, lo! here is a man coming up from the depths of the vale
to the top of the mountain; he comes to the tree whereon the bird
is sitting; from that tree he intends to take wood for the fire.
He fells the tree, he hews the tree, he splits it into logs, and
then he lights it in the fire, the son of Ahura Mazda. What is
the penalty he shall pay
?

1. For defiling the fire by bringing dead matter into it
(see
Vd7.25 seq.
) contrarily to
the rule, 'Put ye only proper and well-examined fuel (in
the fire).' For the purification of unclean
wood, see
Vd7.28 seq.

3. Ahura Mazda answered: 'There is no sin upon a man for any Nasu
that has been brought by dogs, by birds, by wolves, by winds,
or by flies.

4. 'For were there sin upon a man for any Nasu that might have
been brought by dogs, by

birds, by wolves, by winds, or by flies, how soon all
this material world of mine would be only one
Peshotanu
, bent on the destruction of righteousness,
and whose soul will cry and wail
! so
numberless are the beings that die upon the face
of the earth.'

2. 'People guilty of death [i.e. a mortal sin -JHP]' (Comm.)
Cf.
Yasna 53.9 b.

3. After their death, 'When the soul, crying and beaten off, is
driven far away from Paradise' (Comm.) This is imitated from
the Gathas (
Yasna 46.11c
;

51.13b
;
cf.
Vd13.8-9
).

5. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Here is a man
watering a corn-field. The water streams down the field; it streams
again; it streams a third time; and the fourth time, a dog, a
fox, or a wolf carries some Nasu into the bed of the stream: what
is the penalty that the man shall pay
?

4. For defiling the earth and the water: 'If a man wants to irrigate a
field, he must first look after the water-channel, whether there is dead
matter in it or not ..... If the water, unknown to him, comes upon a corpse,
there is no sin upon him. If he has not looked after the rivulet and the
stream, he is unclean' (
Saddar 75
).

6. [Repeat st. 3.]

7. [Repeat st. 4.]

IIa.

8. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy
One! Does water kill
?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Water kills no man:
Asto-vidhotu binds him, and, thus bound
, Vayu

carries him off; and the flood takes him up
, the
flood takes him down
, the flood throws him ashore;
then birds feed upon him. When he goes away
, it
is by the will of Fate he goes.'

5. Water and fire belong to the holy part of the world, and come
from God; how then is it that they kill? 'Let a Gueber light
a sacred fire for a hundred years, if he once fall into it, he shall be
burnt.' Even the Mobeds, if we may trust Elisaeus, complained
that the fire would burn them without regard for their piety, when
to adore it they came too near (Vartan's War, p. 211 of the French
translation by l'Abbé Garabed). The answer was that it is not
the fire nor the water that kills, but the demon of Death and Fate.
'Nothing whatever that I created in the world, said Ohrmazd, does
harm to man; it is the bad Nâi (read Vâi) that kills the man'
(Gr. Riv. 124).

6. 'Asti-vahat is the bad Vai who seizes the life (of man): when
his hand strokes him, it is lethargy; when he casts his shadow
upon him, it is fever; when he looks in his eyes, he destroys life
and it is called Death' (
Bund. 28.35
).
Cf.
Vd4.49
;
Vd19.29
.

7. 'The bad Vai' (Comm.) Vai (Vayu) is the Genius of Destiny, good or evil.

8. To the surface.

9. To the bottom.

10. When he departs.

IIb.

9. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Does fire kill?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Fire kills no man: Asto-vidhotu binds him,
and, thus bound, Vayu carries him off; and the fire burns up life
and limb. When he goes away, it is by the will of Fate he goes.'

III.

10. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If the summer
is past and the winter has come, what shall the worshippers of
Mazda do
? Ahura Mazda answered: 'In every house, in every borough,
they shall raise three rooms for the dead
.'

11. 'In case a man dies during the snowy seasdon, while it is
difficult or impossible to take the corpse to the Dakhma, which
usually stands far from inhabited places. The same case is treated
again in
Vd8.4 seq
.

12. One for men, another for women, a third for children. As
not every house is considerable or rich enough to have these three
accommodations, there will be a common Zad-marj for the village.
The Zad-marj is a small mud house where the corpse is laid, to
lie there till it can be taken to the Dakhma (Anquetil,
Zend-Avesta

II, 583). The Zad-marj is still used in Persia, and in the Gujarati
provinces (where it is called Nasa-khana, 'house for corpses').
In Bombay they use the simpler and more economical method
given in
Vd8.8
.

11. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How large shall
be those rooms for the dead? Ahura Mazda answered: 'Large enough
not to strike the skull of the man, if he
should stand erect,
or his feet or his hands stretched out: such shall be, according
to the law, the rooms for the dead.

13. 'Being in life' (Comm.)

12. 'And they shall let the lifeless body lie
there, for two nights, or for three nights, or a
month long, until the birds begin to fly
, the plants
to grow, the hidden floods
to flow, and the
wind to dry up the earth
.

13. 'And as soon as the birds begin to fly, the plants to grow,
the hidden floods to flow, and the wind to dry up the earth, then
the worshippers of Mazda shall lay down the dead (on the Dakhma),
his eyes towards the sun.

14. To come back.

15. They were hidden under the earth.

16. 'Until the winter is past' (Comm.)

14. 'If the worshippers of Mazda have not, within a year, laid
down the dead (on the Dakhma), his eyes towards the sun, thou
shalt prescribe for that trespass the same penalty as for the
murder of one of the faithful
; until the corpse has heen rained
on, until the Dakhma has heen rained on, until the unclean remains
have been rained on, until the birds have eaten up the corpse.'

17. See
Vd3.41
; note; cf. below, §§ 21-26.

IV.

15. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Is it true at
thou, Ahura Mazda, seizest the waters from the sea Vouru-kasha

with the wind and the clouds?

18. Vouru-kasha or Frakh-kart, the Ocean, wherefrom all
waters come and whereto they return (
Vd21.4
).

16. That thou, Ahura Mazda, takest them down to the corpses
?
that thou, Ahura Mazda, takest them down to the Dakhmas? that
thou, Ahura Mazda, takest them down to the unclean remains? that
thou, Ahura Mazda, takest them down to the bones? and that then
thou, Ahura Mazda, makest them flow back unseen? that thou, Ahura
Mazda, makest them flow back to the sea Puitika
?

17. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is even so as thou hast said, O
righteous Zarathushtra! I, Ahura Mazda, seize the waters from
the sea Vouru-kasha with the wind and the clouds.

18. 'I, Ahura Mazda, take them to the corpses; I, Ahura Mazda,
take them down to the Dakhmas; I, Ahura Mazda, take them down
to the unclean remains; I, Ahura Mazda, take them down to the
bones; then I, Ahura Mazda, make them flow back unseen; I, Ahura
Mazda, make them flow back to the sea Puitika.

19. Zartosht wonders that Ohrmazd fears so little to infringe
his own laws by defiling waters with the dead. In a
Rivayat
, he
asks him bluntly why he forbids men to take corpses to the water,
while he himself sends rain to the Dakhmas (
Gr. Riv.
125).

20. The sea where waters are purified before going back to their
gathering place, the sea Vouru-kasha (see § 19). 'All the thickness,
salt, and impurity of the sea Putik wishes to go to the Frakh-kart
sea; but a mighty high wind, blowing from the Var Satves, drives
it away: whatever is clean and movable passes to the Frakh-kart
sea, and the rest (the unclean element) flows back to the Putik'
(
Bund. 13.10
).

19. 'The waters stand there boiling, boiling up in the heart of
the sea Puitika, and, when cleansed there, they run back again
from the sea Puitika to the sea Vouru-kasha, towards the well-watered
tree
, whereon grow the seeds of my plants of every kind by hundreds,
by thousands, by hundreds of thousands.

20. 'Those plants, I, Ahura Mazda, rain
down upon the earth
, to bring food to the faithful,
and fodder to the beneficent cow; to bring food to

my people that they may live on it, and fodder
to the beneficent cow.'

21. The tree of all seeds (Harvisptokhm), which grows in the
middle of the sea Vouru-kasha; the seeds of all plants are on it.
There is a godlike bird, the Sinamru [simurgh], sitting on that tree; whenever
he flies off the tree, there grow out of it a thousand boughs;
whenever he alights on it, there break a thousand boughs, the seeds
of which are scattered about, and rained down on the earth by
Tishtar (Tishtrya), the rain-god (
Yt12.17
;

Menog-i Khrad 62.37 seq.
;

Bundahishn 27
;
cf.
Vd20.4 seq.
)

V.

21. 'This
is the best, this is the fairest of all things, even
as thou hast said, O pure [Zarathushtra]!'

With these words the holy, Ahura Mazda rejoiced the holy Zarathushtra
:
'Purity is for man, next to life, the greatest good
, that purity,
O Zarathushtra, that is in the Religion of Mazda for him who cleanses
his own self with good thoughts, words, and deeds
.'

22. The cleansing, the purification.

23. 'When Zartosht saw that man is able to escape sin by performing
good works, he was filled with joy' (Comm.)

24. Quotation from the
Gathas

(
Yasna 48.5c
).

25. That is to say, 'Who performs the rites of cleansing according
to the prescriptions of the law.'

22. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! This Law, this
fiend-destroying Law of Zarathushtra
, by what greatness, goodness,
and fairness is it great, good, and fair above all other utterances?

26. The Law (Datem), that part of the religious system of
which the
Vendidad
is the specimen, and the object of which is
the purification of man.

23. Ahura Mazda answered: 'As much above all other floods as is
the sea Vouru-kasha, so much above all other utterances in greatness,
goodness, and fairness is this Law, this fiend-destroying Law
of Zarathushtra.

24. 'As much as a great stream flows swifter than a slender rivulet,
so much above all other utterances in greatness, goodness, and
fairness is this Law, this fiend-destroying Law of Zarathushtra.

'As high as the great tree
stands above the small plants it overshadows,
so high above all other utterances in greatness, goodness, and
fairness is this Law, this fiend-destroying Law of Zarathushtra.

27. 'The royal cypress above small herbs' (Comm.)

25. 'As high as heaven is above the earth that it compasses around,
so high above all other utterances is this Law, this fiend-destroying
Law of Mazda.

'[Therefore], he will apply to the Ratu
, he will apply to the
Sraosha-varez
; whether for a draona-service

that should have been undertaken
and has not been
undertaken
; or for a draona
that should have been offered up and has not been offered up;
or for a draona that should have been entrusted and has not been
entrusted
.

28. 'To take the rule' (Comm.), which probably means, 'to know
what sort of penance he must undergo;' as, when a man has
sinned with the tongue or with the hand, the Dastur (or Ratu) must
prescribe for him the expiation that the sin requires. The Ratu is
the chief priest, the spiritual head of the community.

29. 'To weep for his crime' (Comm.), which may mean, 'to recite
to him the Patet, or, to receive at his hand the proper number of
stripes.' The Sraosha-varez is the priest that superintends the
sacrifice. He receives the confession of the guilty man and very
likely wields the Sraosho-charana.

30. The Srosh-dron, a service in honour of any of the angels,
or of deceased persons, in which small cakes, called draona, are
consecrated in their names, and then given to those present to eat.

31. When it ought not to be.

32. When it ought to be.

33. The meaning of the sentence is not certain. The Commentary
has: 'Whether he has thought what he ought not to
have thought, or has not thought what he ought to have thought;
whether he has said what he ought not to have said, or has not
said what he ought to have said; whether he has done what he ought
not to have done, or has not done what he ought to have done.'

26. 'The Ratu has power to remit him one-third of his penalty
:
if he has committed any other evil deed, it is remitted by his
repentance; if he has committed no other evil deed, he is absolved
by his repentance for ever and ever
.'

34. When the Ratu remits one-third of the sin, God remits the
whole of it (
Saddar 29
).

35. Cf.
Vd3.41.

VI.

27. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If there be
a number of men resting in the same place, on the same carpet,
on the same pillows, be there two men near one another, or five,
or fifty, or a hundred, close by one another; and of those people
one happens to die; how many of them does the Druj Nasu
envelope
with corruption, infection, and pollution?

36. Nasu [Nasa] (
nekuV
) designates both
the corpse and the corpse-demon (the Druj that produces the
corruption and infection of the dead body).

28. Ahura Mazda answered: 'If the dead one be a priest, the Druj
Nasu rushes forth
, O Spitama Zarathushtra! she goes as far as
the eleventh and defiles the ten
.

'If the dead one be a warrior, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the tenth and defiles the nine.

'If the dead one be a husbandman, the Druj Nasu rushes forth,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the ninth and defiles
the eight.

37. In opposition to the case when the dead one is an
Ashmogh (§ 35), as no Nasa issues then.

38. Literally, 'If she goes as far as the eleventh, she defiles the
tenth.' That is to say, she stops at the eleventh and defiles the
next ten. In the
Rivayats
, the
Avesta distinctions are lost, and the defiling power of the
Nasa is the same, whatever may have been the rank of the
dead: 'If there be a number of people sleeping
in the same place, and if one of them happens to die, all those
around him, in any direction, as far as the eleventh, become unclean
if they have been in contact with one another' (
Gr. Riv.
470).

29. 'If it be a shepherd's dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O
Spitama Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the eighth and defiles
the seven.

'If it be a house-dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
she goes as far as the seventh and defiles the six.

30. 'If it be a Vohunazga dog
, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O
Spitama Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the sixth and defiles
the five.

'If it be a Tauruna dog
, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the fifth and defiles the four.

39. A dog without a master (
Vd13.19
).

40. A hunting-dog.

31. 'If it be a porcupine dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the fourth and defiles the three.

'If it be a Jazu dog
, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
she goes as far as the third and defiles the two.

41. This name and the two following, Aiwizu and Vizu, are left
untranslated in the Pahlavi translation.

32. 'If it be an Aiwizu dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the second and defiles the next.

'If it be a Vizu dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
she goes as far as the next, she defiles the next.'

33. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If it be a weasel
,
how many of the creatures of the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] does it directly
defile, how many does it indirectly defile?

42. A weasel. The weasel is one of the creatures of Ahura, for 'it
has been created to fight against the serpent garza and the other
khrafstras that live in holes'
(
Bund. 19.27
).

34. Ahura Mazda answered : 'A weasel does neither directly nor
indirectly defile any of the creatures of the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP], but
him who smites and kills it; to him the uncleanness clings for
ever and ever
.'

43. Not that the unclean one cannot be cleansed, but that his uncleanness
does not pass from him to another.

43. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If the dead
one be such a wicked, two-footed ruffian, as an ungodly Ashemaogha
,
how many of the creatures of the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] does he directly
defile, how many does he indirectly defile?

44. §§ 35-38; cf.
Vd12.21-24
.

45. Ashemaogha, a heretic.

36. Ahura Mazda answered: 'No more than a frog does whose venom
is dried up, and that has been dead more than a year
. Whilst
alive, indeed, O Spitama Zarathushtra! such a wicked, two-legged
ruffian as an ungodly Ashemaogha, directly defiles the creatures
of the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP], and indirectly defiles them.

46. The frog is a creature of Ahriman's, and one of the most
hateful. Cf.
Vd14.5
.

37. 'Whilst alive he smites the water
; whilst alive he blows
out the fire
; whilst alive he carries off the cow
; whilst alive
he smites the faithful man with a deadly blow, that parts the
soul from the body
; not so will he do when dead.

47. By defiling it (a capital crime; see
Vd7.25
).

48. He extinguishes the Warharan fire (a capital crime;
cf.
Vd7.25.
)

49. As a cattle-lifter.

50. As an assassin.

38. 'Whilst alive, indeed, O Spitama Zarathushtra! such a wicked,
two-legged ruffian as an ungodly Ashemaogha robs the faithful
man of the full possession of his food, of his clothing, of his
wood, of his bed, of his vessels
; not so will
he do when dead
.'

51. By defiling them, he deprives the faithful of their use.

52. 'When a wicked man dies, the Druj who was with him during his
lifetime, seizes him and drags him down to Ahriman; therefore,
his body, as the Druj is no longer with it, becomes pure. On the
contrary, when it is a righteous man that dies, the Amahraspands
take his soul to Ohrmazd and the Druj settles in the house of the
body and makes it impure' (Gujastak Abalish).

VII.

39. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When into our
houses here below we have brought the fire, the Baresma, the cups,
the Haoma, and the mortar
, O holy Ahura Mazda! if it come to
pass that either a dog or a man dies there, what shall the worshippers
of Mazda do?

53. In order to perform a sacrifice.

40. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Out of the house, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
shall they take the fire, the Baresma, the cups, the Haoma, and
the mortar; they shall take the dead one out to the proper place

whereto, according to the law, corpses must be brought, to be
devoured there.'

54. The Dakhma.

41. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When shall they
bring back the fire into the house wherein the man has died?

42. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall wait for nine nights in winter,
for a month in summer
, and then they shall bring back the fire
to the house wherein the man has died.'

55. Corruption being worse in summer.

43. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! And if they
shall bring back the fire to the house wherein the man iias died,
within the nine nights, or within the month, what penalty shall
they pay?

44. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall be Peshotanus: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

VIII.

. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If in the house
of a worshipper of Mazda there be a woman with child, and if being
a month gone, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven,
or eight, or nine, or ten months gone
, she bring forth a still-born
child, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

56. §§ 45-54 =
Vd7.60-69
.

57. The pregnancy, without lasting more than nine calendar
months (9 times 30 days), generally extends along ten months on
the calendar (for instance from January 10 to October 10).

46. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The place in that Mazdean house whereof
the ground is the cleanest and the driest, and the least passed through
by flocks and herds, by the fire of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated
bundles of Baresma, and by the faithful;'

47. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from
the fire? How far from the water? How tar fiom the consecrated
bundles of Baresma? How far from the faithful?

48. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty paces from the fire; thirty
paces from the water; thirty paces from the consecrated bundles
of Baresma; three paces from the faithful
;-

58. The carrier alone is kept thirty feet from the faithful
(
Vd3.18
),
as he is cut off from the community: his food is not brought
to him, he has a store prepared for him. The woman, when
armesht, is only temporarily isolated; she stays in the house and
her food is brought to her all but from hand to hand
(
Vd16.6
).

49. 'On that place shall the worshippers of Mazda erect an enclosure
,
and therein shall they establish her with food, therein shall
they establish her with clothes.'

59. The place for the man or woman in state of uncleanness, or
Armesht-gah.

50. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the
food that the woman shall first take?

51. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Gomez
mixed with ashes, three draughts
of it, or six, or nine, to send down the Dakhma within her womb
.

60. Urine of the ox: the so-called Nirang-din;
cf.
Vd8.37
;

Vd19.21
. 'Three cups, or six, or nine, according to her
strength' (Asp.)

61. Her womb is a Dakhma, as it contained a dead body. -- These
nine draughts of gomez mixed with ashes are like an interior
barashnom, as the Barashnom consists of nine successive purifications
with gomez and dust.

52. 'Afterwards she may drink boiling
milk of mares, cows, sheep,
or goats, with pap or without pap
; she may take cooked milk without
water, meal without water, and wine without water
.'

62. Doubtful.

63. Doubtful.

64. 'The water would be defiled;' cf.
Vd7.70 seq
.

53. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How long shall she
remain so? How long shall she live thus on milk, meal, and wine?

54. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Three nights long shall she remain
so; three nights long shall she live thus on milk, meal, and wine.
Then, when three nights have passed, she shall wash her body,
she shall wash her clothes, with gomez and water, by the nine
holes
, and thus shall she be clean.'

65. She shall perform the nine nights' Barashnom, for the
details of which see
Vd9
. That Barashnom is taken forty
days after the delivery.

55. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How long shall
she remain so? How long, after the three nights have gone, shall
she sit confined, and live separated from the rest of the worshippers
of Mazda, as to her seat, her food, and her clothing?

56. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Nine nights long shall she remain so:
nine nights long, after the three nights have gone, shall she
sit confined, and live separated from the rest of the worshippers
of Mazda, as to her seat, her food, and her clothing. Then, when
the nine nights have gone, she shall wash her body, and cleanse
her clothes with gomez and water
.'

66. 'If a woman brings forth a still-born child, after a pregnancy
of one month to ten months, the first food she shall take is nirang
(= gomez) ... fire and ashes; and she is not allowed until the
fourth day to take water or salt, or any food that is cooked with
water or salt: on the fourth day they give her nirang, that she
may cleanse herself and wash her clothes with it, and she is not
allowed to wash herself and her clothes with water until the forty-first
day' (
Gr. Riv.
568).

66. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can those clothes,
when once washed and cleansed, ever be used either by a Zaotar,
or by a Havanan, or by an Atare-vakhsha, or by a Frabaretar, or
by an Abered, or by an Asnatar, or by a Rathwiskar, or by
a Sraosha-varez
,
or by any priest, warrior, or husbandman
?

67. # 57-62 =
Vd7.17-22
.

68. These are the names of the different priests who were engaged
in the sacrifices. The Havanan strains the Haoma; the Atarevakhsha
kindles the fire; the Frabaretar brings to the Zaotar all
that he needs; the Aberet brings the water; the Asnatar washes
and strains the Haoma; the Rathwishkar mixes the Haoma and
the milk; the Zaotar chants the hymns and says the prayers; the
Sraosh-varez superintends the sacrifice. Nowadays there are only
two priests, the Zaotar (Zot) and the Rathwishkar (Raspi), the latter
performing all the accessory services formerly performed by several
priests. Cf.
Nirangistan
, 71 sq.

69. In short, by any of the faithful, when in state of purity.

58. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Never can those clothes, even when
washed and cleansed, be used either by a Zaotar, or by a Havanan,
or by an Atare-vakhsha, or by a Frabaretar, or by an Abered, or
by an Asnatar, or by a Rathwiskar, or by a Sraosha-varez, or by
any priest, warrior, or husbandman.

59. 'But if there be in a Mazdean house a woman who is in her
sickness, or a man who has become unfit for work
, and who must
sit in the place of infirmity
, those clothes shall serve for
their coverings and for their sheets
, until they can withdraw
their hands for prayer
.

70. An Armesht; literally, 'an infirm person,' that is to say, one
who is unclean, during the time of his uncleanness
(
Vd9.33 seq
.),
when all work is forbidden to him.

71. The Armesht-gah, the place of seclusion of the Armesht.

72. The clothing defiled by the dead can only serve for Dashtan
women, even after it has been washed and exposed for six months
to the light of the sun and of the moon
(
Saddar 91
;
cf.
Vd7.10 seq.
)

73. Until they are clean. The unclean must have their hands
wrapped in an old piece of linen, lest they should touch and defile
anything clean.

60. 'Ahura Mazda, indeed, does not allow us to waste anything
of value that we may have, not even so much as an Asperena's

weight of thread, not even so much as a maid lets fall in spinning.

74. See
Vd4.48, note 4
.

61. 'Whosoever throws any clothing on a dead body
, even so much
as a maid lets fall in spinning, is not a pious man whilst alive,
nor shall he, when dead, have a place in Paradise.

75. Cf.
Vd8.23 seq
. It appears from those passages that
the dead must lie on the mountain naked, or 'clothed only with
the light of heaven' (
Vd6.51
). The modern custom is to
clothe them with old clothing (Dadabhai Naoroji,
Manners and
Customs of the Parsis
, p. 15). 'When a man dies and receives
the order (to depart), the older the shroud they make for him, the
better. It must be old, worn out, but well washed: they must not
lay anything new on the dead. For it is said in the Zand
Vendidad
,
If they put on the dead even so much as a thread from the distaff
more than is necessary, every thread shall become in the other
world a black snake clinging to the heart of him who made that
shroud, and even the dead shall rise against him and seize him by
the skirt, and say, That shroud which thou madest for me has become
food for worms and vermin'
(
Saddar 12
). After the fourth
day, when the soul is in heaven, then rich garments are offered up
to it, which it will wear in its celestial life
(
Saddar 87
).

62. 'He makes himself a viaticum unto the world of the wicked,
into that world
, made of darkness, the offspring
of darkness
,
which is Darkness' self. To that world, to the world of Hell,
you are delivered by your own doings, by your own religion, O
sinners
!'

76. 'Where darkness can be seized with the hand' (Comm.; cf.

Aogemadaeca
); something more than the
'visible darkness.'

77. The Commentary has, 'the place of those who impregnate
darkness, for the Druj who conceives seed from the sinner comes
from that place' (cf.
Vd18.30 seq
.)

78. Quotation from the Gathas (
Yasna 31.20
).

vd5sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 6
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd6sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd6sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 6. Purity Laws.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995. Updated Jun 23, 2001.

,
American Edition, New York, The Christian Literature Company, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.

I (1-9). How long the earth remains unclean, when defiled by the
dead.

II (10-25). Penalties for defiling the ground with dead matter.

III (26-41). Purification of the different sorts of water, when
defiled by the dead.

IV (42-43). Purification of the Haoma.

V (44-51). The place for corpses; the Dakhmas.

FARGARD 6. Purity laws

I.

1. How long shall the piece of ground he fallow whereon dogs
or men have died? Ahura Mazda answered: 'A year long shall the
piece of ground he fallow whereon dogs or men have died, O holy
Zarathustra!

Notes:

2. 'A year long shall no worshipper of Mazda sow or water that
piece of ground whereon dogs or men have died; he may sow as he
likes the rest of the ground; he may water it as he likes
.

1. Cf.
Vd7.45 seq.

3. 'If within the year they shall sow or water the piece of ground
whereon dogs or men have died, they are guilty of the sin of "burying
the dead" towards the water, towards the earth, and towards
the plants
.'

2. 'To the water which they pour out, to the earth which they plough.
to the plants which they sow' (Comm.)

4. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda shall sow or water, within the year, the piece of ground
whereon dogs or men have died, what is the penalty that they shall
pay?

5. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They are Peshotanus: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

3. 'If they plough and sow it, one tanapuhr (see Introd. V, 19);
if they pour water on it, one tanapuhr; if they plough, sow, and
water it, two tanapuhrs' (Comm.)

6. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda want to till that piece of ground again
, to water it,
to sow it, and to plough it, what shall they do?

4. Even when a year's space is past, the ground is not free ipso
facto.

7. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall look on the ground for any
bones, hair, dung, urine, or blood that may be there.'

8. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If they shall
not look on the ground for any bones, hair, dung, urine, or blood
that may be there, what is the penalty that they shall pay?

9. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They are Peshotanus: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

II.

10. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as the top joint of the little finger, and if grease or
marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

11. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
thirty stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as the top joint of the fore-finger, and if grease or marrow
flow from it on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

13. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Fifty stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
fifty stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

14. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as the top joint of the middle finger, and if grease or
marrow flow from it on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

15. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seventy stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
seventy stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

16. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as a finger or as a rib, and if grease or marrow flow from
it on to the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

17. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ninety stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
ninety stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

18. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as two fingers or as two ribs, and if grease or marrow flow
from it on the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

19. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is Peshotanu: two hundred stripes
with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

20. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as an arm-bone or as a thigh-bone, and if grease or marrow
flow from it on the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

21. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
four hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

22. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground a bone of a dead dog, or of a dead man, as
large as a man's skull, and if grease or marrow flow from it on
the ground, what penalty shall he pay?

23. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Six hundred stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
six hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

24. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw on the ground the whole body of a dead dog, or of a dead
man, and if grease or marrow flow from it on the ground, what
penalty shall he pay?

25. Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra,
a thousand stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

III.

26. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a worshipper
of Mazda, walking, or running, or riding, or driving, come upon
a corpse in a stream of running water, what shall he do?

27. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Taking off his shoes, putting off his
clothes, while the others wait
, O Zarathushtra! he shall enter
the river, and take the dead out of the water; he shall go down
into the water ankle-deep, knee-deep, waist-deep, or a man's full
depth, till he can reach the dead body
.'

5. Ready to help him in case of need.

6. 'If he is able to draw out the corpse and does so, it is a pious
deed worth a tanapuhr (that is, one by which a tanapuhr
sin can be cancelled); if he is able to draw it out and does not
do so, it is a tanapuhr sin. Gugoshasp says, It is a margarzan
sin (a capital crime)' (Comm.)

28. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If, however,
the body be already falling to pieces and rotting, what shall
the worshipper of Mazda do?

29. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He shall draw out of the water as much
of the corpse as he can grasp with both hands, and he shall lay
it down on the dry ground; no sin attaches to him for any bone,
hair, grease, dung, urine, or blood that may drop back into the
water.'

30. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of
the water in a pond does the Druj Nasu defile with corruption,
infection, and pollution?

31. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Six steps on each of the four sides.
As long as the corpse has not been taken out of the water, so
long shall that water be unclean and unfit to drink. They shall,
therefore, take the corpse out of the pond, and lay it down on
the dry ground.

32. 'And of the water they shall draw off the half, or the third,
or the fourth, or the fifth part, according as they are able or
not; and after the corpse has been taken out and the water has
been drawn off, the rest of the water is clean, and both cattle
and men may drink of it at their pleasure, as before.'

33. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of
the water in a well does the Druj Nasu defile with corruption,
infection, and pollution?

34. Ahura Mazda answered: 'As long as the corpse has not been
taken out of the water, so long shall that water be unclean and
unfit to drink. They shall, therefore, take the corpse out of
the well, and lay it down on the dry ground.

35. 'And of the water in the well they shall draw off the half,
or the third, or the fourth, or the fifth part, according as they
are able or not; and after the corpse has been taken out and the
water has been drawn off, the rest of the water is clean, and
both cattle and men may drink of it at their pleasure, as before.'

36. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of
a sheet of snow or hail does the Druj Nasu defile with corruption,
infection, and pollution?

37. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Three steps

on each of the four sides.
As long as the corpse has not been taken out of the water, so
long shall that water be unclean and unfit to drink. They shall,
therefore, take the corpse out of the pond, and lay it down on
the dry ground.

7. Nine feet on the four sides.

38. 'After the corpse has been taken out, and the snow or the
hail has melted, the water is clean, and both cattle and men may
drink of it at their pleasure, as before.'

39. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of
the water of a running stream does the Druj Nasu defile with corruption,
infection, and pollution?

40. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Three steps down the stream, nine steps
up the stream, six steps across. As long as the corpse has not
been taken out of the water, so long shall that water be unclean
and unfit to drink. They shall, therefore, take the corpse out
of the pond, and lay it down on the dry ground.

41. 'After the corpse has been taken out and
the stream has flowed three times
, the water is
clean, and both cattle and men may drink
of it at their pleasure, as before.'

8. Three times the measure up the stream (that is nine feet).

IV.

42. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the Haoma
that has been touched with Nasu from a dead dog, or from a dead
man, be made clean again?

43. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It can, O holy Zarathushtra! If it
has been prepared for the

sacrifice
, there is to it no corruption, no death, no
touch of any Nasu
. If it has not been prepared
for the sacrifice, [the stem] is defiled the length of
four fingers
: it
shall be laid down on
the ground,
in the middle of the house, for a year long. When
the year is passed, the faithful may drink of its juice
at their pleasure, as before.'

9. Pounded and strained.

10. Because the Haoma is the plant of life; when strained for the
sacrifice, it is the king of healing plants
(
Bund. 24
); the
dead shall become immortal by tasting of the white Haoma
(
ibid. Bund. 31
).

11. Four fingers from the point touched by the Nasau. That part of
the stem shall be cut off (Framji): the rest can be made clean.

12. What is left of the stem.

V.

44. O Maker of the material world, thou holy One! Whither shall
we bring, where shall we lay the bodies of the dead
, O Ahura Mazda?

13. In places where there are no Dakhmas; for instance, in the
country.

45. Ahura Mazda answered: 'On the highest summits
, where they
know there are always corpse-eating dogs and corpse-eating birds,
O holy Zarathushtra!

14. 'On the top of a mountain' (Comm.) Cf.
Vd8.10
.

46. 'There shall the worshippers of Mazda fasten the corpse, by
the feet and by the hair, with iron,
stones, or clay, lest the
corpse-eating dogs and the corpse-eating birds shall go and carry
the bones to the water and to the trees.

14b. Dar: brass. -JHP

47. 'If they shall not fasten the corpse, so that the corpse-eating
dogs and the corpse-eating birds may go and carry the bones to
the water and to the trees, what is the penalty that they shall
pay?'

48. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall be Peshotanus: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahe-ashtra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

49. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Whither shall
we bring, where shall we lay the bones
of the dead, O Ahura Mazda?

15. When the flesh has been stripped off the bones, thay may be.
collected in a stone ossuary. See following note.

50. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The worshippers
of Mazda shall make a receptacle
out of
the reach of the dog, of the fox, and of the
wolf, and wherein rain-water cannot stay.

16. "When the corpse-eating birds have eaten the fat, that
fat which, when it is not possible to eat it, becomes rotten,
offensive, and fraught with noxious creatures, then men shall
properly convey the bones away to the bonne-receptacle (astôdân),
which one is to elevate so from the ground, and over
which a roof so stands, that in no way does the rain fall upon
the dead matter, nor the water reach up to it therein, nor are
the dog and fox able to go to it, and for the sake of light
coming to it a hole is made therein"
(
Dadistan
18.3
; tr. West).

51. 'They shall make it, if they can afford
it, with stones, plaster, or earth
; if they cannot
afford it, they shall lay down the dead man on the
ground, on his carpet and his pillow, clothed with
the light of heaven, and beholding the sun
.'

17. Such stone ossuaries have been found at Bushir, by Mr. Malcolm;
earth ossuaries, found at Susa, were brought to the Louvre by
M. Dieulafoy.

18. The dead must see the sun: that is why the astodan has holes
for letting the light in (see note 16 above).

vd6sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 7
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd7sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd7sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 7. Purity Laws, Avestan medicine.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jun 25, 2001.

,
American Edition, New York, The Christian Literature Company, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.

I (1-5). How long after death the Druj Nasu takes possession of
the corpse.

II (6-9 = V, 27-30). How far the defiling power of the Druj Nasu
extends.

III (10-22). Cleansing of clothes defiled by the dead.

IV (23-24). Eating of Nasu an abomination.

V (25-27), Bringing Nasu to fire or water an abomination.

VI (28-35). Cleansing of wood and corn defiled by the dead.

VII a (36-40). Physicians; their probation.

VII b (41-44). Their fees.

VIII (45-59), Purification of the earth, of the Dakhmas. The Dakhmas
and the Daevas,

IX (60-72; 66-69 = V, 45-54). Treatment of a woman who has brought
forth a still-born child.

X (73-75). Cleansing of vessels defiled by the dead.

XI (76). Cleansing of the cow.

XII (78). Unclean libations.

This chapter would offer tolerable unity, but for a digression
on medicine, which would be better placed as an introduction to
the last three chapters. Sections II and IX, parts of which have
already been found in Fargard V, are more suitably placed here.
This chapter, as a whole, deals with the action of the Druj Nasu,
from the moment she takes hold of the corpse, and shows how and
when the several objects she has defiled become clean, namely,
clothes, wood, corn, earth, women, vessels, and cows.

FARGARD 7. Purity laws

I.

Notes:

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When a man
dies, at what moment does the Druj Nasu rush upon him?'

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Directly after death, as soon as the
soul has left the body, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the Druj Nasu
comes and rushes upon him, from the regions of the north
, in the
shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking out, droning
without end, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras
.

1. Hell lies in the north; see
Vd2.10 n.
;

Vd3.7 n.
;
Vd19.1
;

Hadokht Nask, section 3.25
;

Bundahishn 15.19
.

2. Khrafstra is a general denomination for noxious animals.

[3. 'On him she stays until the dog has seen the
corpse
or eaten it up, or until the flesh-eating birds
have taken flight towards it
. When the dog has seen it or eaten it up, or when the flesh-eating
birds have taken flight towards it, then the Druj Nasu rushes
away to the regions of the north in the shape of a raging fly,
with knees and tail sticking out, droning without end, and like
unto the foulest Khrafstras.']

3. Until the Sag-did has been performed (see

Vd8.16 seq.
)

4. The Sag-did may be performed by birds of prey as well as by dogs.
The dog smites the Nasu when it brings its muzzle near to the
dead, the bird (mountain hawk, sparrow (?), or eagle) when its
shadow passes over the body (Comm. ad § 2; cf. § 29). § 3
is from the
Vendidad Sada
.

4. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If the man has
been killed by a dog, or by a wolf, or by witchcraft, or by the
artifices of hatred
, or by falling down a precipice, or by the
law
, or by calumny
, or by the noose
,
how long after death does the Druj Nasu come and rush upon the dead?

5. 'By poison' (Comm.)

6. Literally, 'by men;' that is to say, put to death by the community
according to law (Comm.)

7. If he has been condemned unjustly.

8. If he has strangled himself.

5. Ahura Mazda answered: 'At the next watch after death
, the Druj
Nasu comes and rushes upon the dead, from the regions of the north,
in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking out,
droning without end, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras.'

9. The day is divided into five watches or ratu. If the man dies
a natural death, the Druj comes directly; if the death be violent
and unlooked for, the Druj comes later (as the corruption does
not set in so quickly).

II
.

6. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If there be a
number of men resting in the same place, on the same carpet, on
the same pillows, be there two men near one another, or five,
or fifty, or a hundred, close by one another; and of those people
one happens to die; how many of them does the Druj Nasu envelope
with corruption, infection, and pollution?

10. §§ 6-9 =
Vd5.27-30
.

7. Ahura Mazda answered:
'If the dead one be a priest, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the eleventh and defiles the
ten.

'If the dead one he a warrior, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the tenth and defiles the nine.

'If the dead one be a husbandman, the Druj Nasu rushes forth,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the ninth and defiles
the eight.

8. 'If it be a shepherd's dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the eighth and defiles the seven.

'If it be a house dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
she goes as far as the seventh and defiles the six.

9. 'If it he a Vohunazga dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
she goes as far as the sixth and defiles the five.

'If it be a Tauruna dog, the Druj Nasu rushes forth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! she goes as far as the fifth and defiles the four
.'

. . . 'Those clothes shall serve for their coverings and for their
sheets
.'. . .

11. This enumeration is less complete than that in 'the fifth Fargard,
as it comprises only the first four sorts of dogs; the rest is
to be supplied as in
Farg. V, 31-38
.

12. This phrase, which forms part of § 19, is wrongly inserted here.

III.

10. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What part of
his bedding
and pillow does the Druj Nasu defile with corruption,
infection, and pollution?

13. The bedding on which he has died.

11. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The Druj Nasu defiles with corruption,
infection, and pollution the upper sheet and the inner garment
.'

14. The upper sheet of the bed and the inner garment of the body,
that is to say, only those clothes which have been in direct
contact with the dead.

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can that garment
be made clean, O holy Ahura Mazda! that has been touched by the
carcass of a dog or the corpse of a man?

13. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It can, O holy Zarathushtra!'

How so?

'If there be on the garment seed, or blood, or dirt, or vomit,
the worshippers of Mazda shall rend it to pieces, and bury it
under the ground
.

15. According to the Commentary only that part which has been defiled
is rent off; the rest may still be used.

14. 'But if there be no seed [on the garment], nor blood, nor
dirt, nor vomit, then the worshippers of Mazda shall wash it with
gomez.

15. 'If it be leather, they shall wash it with gomez three times,
they shall rub it with earth three times, they shall wash it with
water three times, and afterwards they shall expose it to the
air for three months at the window of the house.

'If it be woven cloth, they shall wash it with gomez six times
,
they shall rub it with earth six times, they shall wash it with
water six times, and afterwards they shall expose it to the air
for six months at the window of the house.

16. See
Vd19.21
.

16. 'The spring named Ardvi Sura, O Spitama Zarathushtra! that
spring of mine, purifies the seed of males, the womb of females,
the milk of females
.'

17. This clause is a quotation from
Yasna 65.5
,
intended to illustrate the cleansing power of water. Ardvi Sura is the goddess
of the waters. See
Vd21.6 notes
.

17. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can those clothes,
when once washed and cleansed, ever be used either by a Zaotar,
or by a Havanan, or by an Atare-vakhsha, or by a Frabaretar, or
by an Abered, or by an Asnatar, or by a Rathwiskar, or by a Sraosha-varez,
or by any priest, warrior, or husbandman?

18. §§ 17-22 = Vd5.57-62.

18. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Never can those clothes, even when
washed and cleansed, be used either by a Zaotar, or by a Havanan,
or by an Atare-vakhsha, or by a Frabaretar, or by an Abered, or
by an Asnatar, or by a Rathwiskar, or by a Sraosha-varez, or by
any priest, warrior, or husbandman.

19. 'But if there be in a Mazdean house a woman who is in her
sickness, or a man who has become unfit for work, and who must
sit in the place of infirmity, those clothes shall serve for their
coverings and for their sheets, until they can withdraw their
hands for prayer.

20. 'Ahura Mazda, indeed, does not allow us to waste anything
of value that we may have, not even so much as an Asperena's weight
of thread, not even so much as a maid lets fall in spinning.

21. 'Whosoever throws any clothing on a dead body, even so much
as a maid lets fall in spinning, is not a pious man whilst alive,
nor shall he, when dead, have a place in Paradise.

22. 'He makes himself a viaticum unto the world of the wicked,
into that world, made of darkness, the offspring of darkness,
which is Darkness' self. To that world, to the world of Hell,
you are delivered by your own doings, by your own religion, O
sinners!'

IV.

23. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can he be clean
again who has eaten of the carcass of a dog or of the corpse of
a man
?

19. The carcase-eater lodges the Nasu in himself; he becomes a Nasu,
and therefore must be destroyed; cf. below, § 76 seq.
[Cannibalism. See
Vd8.73-74
. -JHP]

24. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He cannot, O holy Zarathushtra! His
burrow
shall be dug out, his heart shall be torn out, his bright
eyes shall be put out; the Druj Nasu falls upon him, takes hold
of him even to the end of the nails, and he is unclean thenceforth,
for ever and ever
.'

20. His house, as he is assimilated to a devouring Khrafstra;
see
Vd3.7
.

21. Till the resurrection. 'It is prescribed in the
Vendidad
that
if a man shall eat of a carcase, his house and family shall he
destroyed, his heart shall be torn out of his body, his eyes shall
be put out, and his soul shall abide in hell till the resurrection'
(
Saddar 71
). 'He who eats of
a carcase with sinful intent is both unclean and margarzan; Barashnum
and Nirang are of no avail for him, he must die. If there has been no
sinful intent, he may wash himself; one may give him the ashes and
the gomez (Comm.); he is unclean, he is not margarzan' (Old Riv. 115 b).

V.

25. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can he be clean
again, O holy Ahura Mazda! who has brought a corpse with filth
into the waters, or unto the fire, and made either unclean?

26. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He cannot, O holy Zarathushtra! Those
wicked ones it is, those Nasu-cutters, that most increase spiders
and locusts
; those wicked ones it is, those Nasu-cutters, that
most increase the grass-destroying drought
.

22. 'It is said in the
Avesta
that when there are many gnats and
locusts it is owing to corpses having been brought to water and
to fire' (
Saddar
).

23. § 26 refers chiefly to the damage produced by the defilement
of the waters, and § 27 to that produced by the defilement
of the fire.

27. 'Those wicked ones it is, those Nasu-cutters, that increase
most the power of the winter
, produced by the fiends, the cattle-killing,
thick- snowing, overflowing, the piercing, fierce, mischievous
winter
. Upon them comes and rushes the Druj Nasu she takes hold
of them even to the end of the nails, and they are unclean, thenceforth,
for ever and ever
.'

24. See note 23 above.

25. In the same way (by the bringing of corpses to water and to fire),
winter grows colder, and summer grows warmer'
(
Saddar
).

26. Whoever shall do that deed, shall pay for it in this world
and in the next; they shall flay his body in the presence of the
assembly, they shall tear him limb from limb, and his corpse shall
be thrown away to dogs and ravens, . . . and when his soul comes
to the other world, he shall suffer tortures from the Devs. If
he has not made his Patet [confession], his soul shall remain in hell till
the day of resurrection' (
Gr. Riv.
p. 123).

VI.

28. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the wood
be made clean, O holy Ahura Mazda! whereunto Nasu has been brought
from a dead dog, or from a dead man?

29. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It can, O holy Zarathushtra!'

How so?

'If the Nasu has not yet been expelled
by the corpse-eating dogs,
or by the corpse-eating birds
, they shall lay down, apart on the
ground, all the wood on a Vitasti
a all around, if the wood be
dry; on a Frarathni
all around, if it be wet; then they shall
sprinkle it once over with water, and it shall be clean
.

27. That is to say, if the Sag-did has not yet been performed.
Read: 'If the Nasu has been expelled...' (that, is to say, if
the Sag-did has been performed). See note 6.

28. See above, verse 3, note 3.

29. Twelve fingers; a span.

30. The Frârâthni is, as it seems, as much as a forearm.

31. 'After a year,' according to the Commentary.

30. 'But if the Nasu has already been expelled
by the corpse-eating
dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds, they shall lay down, apart
on the ground, all the wood on a Frarathni all around, if the
wood be dry; on a Frabazu
all around, if it be wet; then they
shall sprinkle it once over with water, and it shall be clean.

32. Read: 'But if the Nasu has not yet been expelled.' It appears
from the similar passages
(
Vd8.35, 36
, and

98, 99
) and from
the general principles of uncleanness that the words 'If the Nasu
has not yet been expelled,' in § 29, have been misplaced there from
§ 30, and that the corresponding words in § 30 belong to
§ 29; because uncleanness spreads less far, when the Sag-did
has taken place.

33. A measure of unknown extent; 'an arm's length,' it would seem.

31. 'Thus much of the wood around the dead shall they lay down,
apart on the ground, according as the wood is dry or wet; as it
is hard or soft; they shall sprinkle it once over with water,
and it shall be clean.'

32. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the corn
or the fodder be made clean O holy Ahura Mazda! whereunto Nasu
has been brought from a dead dog, or from a dead man?

33. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It can, O holy Zarathushtra!' How so?

'If the Nasu has not yet been expelled
by the corpse-eating dogs,
or by the corpse-eating birds they shall lay down, apart on the
ground, all the corn on a Frarathni all around, if the corn be
dry on a Frabazu all around, if it be wet; then they shall sprinkle
it once over with water, and it shall be clean.

34. Read: 'If the Nasu has already been expelled . . .' See § 29
note.

34. 'But if the Nasu has already been expelled
by the corpse-eating
dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds, they shall lay down, apart
on the ground, all the corn on a Frabazu all around, if the corn
be dry; on a Vibazu
all around, if it be wet then they shall sprinkle
it once over with water, and it shall be clean.

35. Read: 'If the Nasu has already been expelled . . .' See § 30
note.

36. A measure of unknown extent; 'an ell,' it would seem.

35. 'Thus much of the corn around the dead shall they lay down,
apart on the ground, according as the corn is dry or wet; as it
is sown or not sown; as it is reaped or not reaped; [as it is
beaten or not beaten]
; as it is winnowed or not winnowed
; [as
it is ground or not ground]
; as it is kneaded [or not kneaded]
;
they shall sprinkle it once over with water, and it shall be clean.'

37. From the
Vendidad Sada
.

38. Doubtful.

39. This is supplied, as it seems to be required by the context
and by the Pahlavi translation.

VIIa.

36. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a worshipper
of Mazda want to practice the art of healing, on whom shall he
first prove his skill? on worshippers of Mazda or on worshippers
of the Daevas
?

40. On Zoroastrians or on idolaters (or, what is tantamount, on
Iranians or on non-Iranians).

37. Ahura Mazda answered: 'On worshippers of the Daevas shall
he first prove himself, rather than on worshippers of Mazda. If
he treat with the knife a worshipper of the Daevas and he die;
if he treat with the knife a second worshipper of the Daevas and
he die; if he treat with the knife for the third time a worshipper
of the Daevas and he die, he is unfit for ever and ever.

38. 'Let him therefore never attend any worshipper of Mazda; let
him never treat with the knife and worshipper of Mazda, nor wound
him with the knife. If he shall ever attend any worshipper of
Mazda, if he shall ever treat with the knife any worshipper of
Mazda, and wound him with the knife, he shall pay for his wound
the penalty for willful murder
.

41. For baodhô-varshta, literally, 'done with full conscience.'

39. 'If he treat with the knife a worshipper of the Daevas and
he recover; if he treat with the knife a second worshipper of
the Daevas and he recover; if for the third time he treat with
the knife a worshipper of the Daevas and he recover; then he is
fit for ever and ever
.

42. 'Some say, One who has been qualified may become disqualified;
one who has been disqualified shall never become qualified' (Comm.
ad § 43).

40. 'He may henceforth at his will attend worshippers of Mazda;
he may at his will treat with the knife worshippers of Mazda,
and heal them with the knife.

VIIb.

41. 'A healer shall heal a priest for a blessing of the just
;
he shall heal the master of a house for the value of an ox of
low value; he shall heal the lord of a borough
for the value of
an ox of average value; he shall heal the lord of a town for the
value of an ox of high value; he shall heal the lord of a province
for the value of a chariot and four
.

43. The priest will say to him: Be holy! (that is to say, be one
of the blest!) 'Thus he will become holy (
i.e.
be will go to Paradise);
there is no equivalent in money. Some say, It is given when
the priest has not 3000 stirs' (Comm.)

44. A group of several houses; Aspendiˆrji and Anquetil say,
'a street.'

45. 'A value of seventy stirs' (Comm.)

42. 'He shall heal the wife of the master of a house for the value
of a she-ass; he shall heal the wife of the lord of a borough
for the value of a cow; he shall heal the wife of the lord of
a town for the value of a mare; he shall heal the wife of the
lord of a province for the value of a she-camel.

43. 'He shall heal the heir of a great house for the value of
an ox of high value; he shall heal an ox of high value for the
value of an ox of aver- age value; he shall heal an ox of average
value for the value of an ox of low value; he shall heal an ox
of low value for the value of a sheep; he shall heal a sheep for
the value of a piece of meat
.

46. Cf. the tariff of fees for the cleanser,
Vd9.37 seq.

44. 'If several healers offer themselves together, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
namely, one who heals with the knife, one who heals with herbs,
and one who heals with the Holy Word [manthra]
, let one apply to the healing
by the Holy Word: for this one is the best-healing of all healers
who heals with the Holy Word; he will best drive away sickness
from the body of the faithful
.'

47. 'By spells' (Comm.; cf.
Odyssea
XIX, 457). This classification
was not unknown to Asclepios: he relieved the sick 'now with caressing
spells, now with soothing drink or balsam, now with the knife'
(Pindaros,
Pyth.
III, 5 I).

48. Cf.
Yt3.6
. The treatment by the
Holy Word seems not to consist only in the recitation of spells,
but the spells must be accompanied by the ceremony of the
Barashnum (see
Vd22
).

VIII.

45. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How long after
the corpse of a dead man has been laid down on the ground, clothed
with the light of heaven and beholding the sun, is the ground
clean again
?

49. Restored to the purity of its nature, and fit to till; as it remains
Nasu till that time.

46. Ahura Mazda answered: 'When the corpse of a dead man has lain
on the ground for a year, clothed with the light of heaven, and
beholding the sun, then the ground is clean again, O holy Zarathushtra
!'

50. See
Vd6.1 seq.

47. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How long after
the corpse of a dead man has been buried in the earth, is the
earth clean again?

48. Ahura Mazda answered: 'When the corpse of a dead man has lain
buried in the earth for fifty years
, O Spitama Zarathushtra! then
the earth is clean again
.'

51. The time necessary to consume the corpse to its last particle.

52. Cf.
Vd3.36 seq.

49. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How long after
the corpse of a dead man has been laid down on a Dakhma, is the
ground, whereon the Dakhma stands, clean again?

50. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Not until the dust of the corpse, O
Spitama Zarathushtra! has mingled with the dust of the earth
.
Urge every one in the material world, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
to pull down Dakhmas
.

53. A space of time estimated at fifty years (Comm.)
See
Vd3.13.

54. See
Vd3.9, text and note, and § 13
.

51. 'He who should pull down Dakhmas, even so much thereof as
the size of his own body, his sins in thought, word, and deed
are remitted as they would be by a Patet; his sins in thought,
word, and deed are undone
.

55. 'A tanapuhr sin is remitted thereby' (Comm.)

52. 'Not for his soul shall the two spirits wage war with one
another
; and when he enters Paradise, the stars, the moon, and
the sun shall rejoice in him; and I, Ahura Mazda, shall rejoice
in him, saying: " Hail, O man! thou who hast just passed
from the decaying world into the undecaying one
!"'

56. When a man dies, hell and Paradise, fiends and gods struggle
for the possession of his soul: Astovidhotush, Vizaresha, and the
bad Vayu drag the souls of the wicked to hell; Mithra, Sraosha,
Rashnu, and the good Vayu take the souls of the good to Paradise
(see
Vd19.29 seq.
;

Hadhokht Nask
;

Menog-i Khrad 2
). The struggle
lasts for three days and three nights (the sadis), during which
time the relatives of the dead offer up prayers and sacrifices
to Sraosha, Rashnu, and Vayu, to assure him their protection
(See
Vd9.56
).

57.
Hadhokht Nask 16
and

Vd19.31
.

. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Where are there
Daevas: Where is it they offer worship to the Daevas: What is
the place whereon troops of Daevas rush together, whereon troops
of Daevas come rushing along? What is the place whereon they rush
together to kill their fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds
and their thousands, their thousands and their tens of thousands,
their tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads?

58. §§ 53, 54 belong to the Commentary; they are composed
of disconnected quotations, part of which refers to the different
deeds by which a tanapuhr sin may be redeemed, while the
other part refers to the rules of what may be called the book-keeping
of good actions and sins.

56. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Those Dakhmas that are built upon the
face of the earth, O Spitama Zarathushtra! and whereon are laid
the corpses of dead men, that is the place where there are Daevas,
that is the place whereon troops of Daevas rush together; whereon
troops of Daevas come rushing along; whereon they rush together
to kill their fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and their
thousands, their thousands and their tens of thousands, their
tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads.

57. 'On those Dakhmas, O Spitama Zarathushtra! those Daevas take
food and void filth. As you, men, in the material world, you cook
meal and eat cooked meat, so do they. It is, as it were, the smell
of their feeding that you smell there, O men!

58. 'For thus they go on reveling, until that stench is rooted
in the Dakhmas. In those Dakhmas arise the infection of diseases,
itch, hot fever, naeza
, cold fever, rickets, and hair untimely
white
. On those Dakhmas meet the worst murderers, from the hour
when the sun is down
.

59. Doubtful.

60. Albinism was regarded as sent by the demons. When Zâl was
born with white hair, his father Sâm exposed on the Alburz 'that
child of Dev, with an old man's head' (Firdausi).

61. Cemeteries are the meeting-place of robbers and murderers.

59. 'And people of small understanding who do not seek for better
understanding
, the Jainis
make those diseases
grow stronger by a third
, on their thighs, on their hands,
on their three-plaited hair
.'

62. 'Who do not seek for instruction.'

63. [i.e. Genie, jinn, djinn -JHP] 'The Jahi' (Comm.)
The Jaini seems to be the Jahi as 'killing,' as bringing sickness.

64. The general meaning of the sentence seems to be that, for want
of hygiene, diseaes grow worse through the infection from the
Dakhmas.

65. Doubtful.

IX.

. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If in the house
of a worshipper of Mazda there be a woman with child, and if being
a month gone, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven,
or eight, or nine, or ten months gone, she bring forth a still-born
child, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

66. §§ 60-69 =
Vd5.45-54
.
See the Commentary there.

61. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The place in that Mazdean house whereof
the ground is the cleanest and the driest, and the least passed
through by flocks and herds, by the fire of Ahura Mazda, by the
consecrated bundles of baresma, and by the faithful;'

62. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from
the fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated
bundles of baresma? How far from the faithful?

63. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty paces from the fire; thirty
paces from the water; thirty paces from the consecrated bundles
of Baresma; three paces from the faithful;-

64. 'On that place shall the worshippers of Mazda erect an enclosure,
and therein shall they establish her with food, therein shall
they establish her with clothes.'

65. O Maker of the material word, thou Holy One! What is the food
that the woman shall first take?

66. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Gomez mixed with ashes, three draughts
of it, or six, or nine, to send down the Dakhma within her womb.

67. 'Afterwards she may drink boiling milk of mares, cows, sheep,
or goats, with pap or without pap; she may take cooked milk without
water, meal without water, and wine without water.' 68. O Maker
of the material world, thou Holy One! How long shall she remain
so? How long shall she live thus on milk, meal, and wine?

69. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Three nights long shall she remain
so; three nights long shall she live thus on milk, meal, and wine.
Then, when three nights have passed, she shall wash her body,
she shall wash her clothes, with gomez and water, by the nine
holes, and thus shall she be clean.'

70. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! But if fever
befall her unclean body, if these two worst pains, hunger and
thirst, befall her, may she be allowed to drink water
?

67. Before those three days have passed.

71. Ahura Mazda answered: 'She may; the first thing for her is
to have her life saved. From the hands of one of the holy men,
a holy faithful man, who knows the holy knowledge
, she shall drink
of the strength-giving water. But you, worshippers of Mazda, fix
ye the penalty for it. The Ratu being applied to, the Sraosha-varez
being applied to
, shall prescribe the penalty to be paid
.'

68. If there is near her a pious and intelligent man, who recognises
that her life would be endangered by too strict an adherence to
the rule, he will let her depart from it.

69. See
Vd5.25
.

70. For the water having been defiled.

72. What is the penalty to be paid?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'The deed is that of a Peshotanu: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana
.'

71. A penalty to be undergone by the husband, at least in modern
practice: 'If through fear of death or of serious illness she
has drunk water before the appointed time, her husband shall make
Patet for her fault before the Dastur' (
Old Riv.
98 b).

X.

73. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the eating-vessels
be made clean that have been touched by Nasu from a dog, or Nasu
from a man?

74. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They can, O holy Zarathushtra!'

How so?

'If they be of gold, you shall wash them once with gomez, you
shall rub them once with earth, you shall wash them once with
water, and they shall be clean.

'If they be of silver, you shall wash them twice with gomez, you
shall rub them twice with earth, you shall wash them twice with
water, and they shall be clean.

[75. 'If they be of iron,
you shall wash them thrice with gomez,
you shall rub them thrice with earth, you shall wash them thrice
with water, and they shall be clean.

71b. Dar: brass. -JHP

'If they be of steel, you shall wash them four times with gomez,
you shall rub them four times with earth, you shall wash them
four times with water, and they shall be clean.

'If they be of stone, you shall wash them six times with gomez,
you shall rub them six times with earth, you shall wash them six
times with water, and they shall be clean
.]

'If they be of earth, of wood, or of clay, they are unclean for
ever and ever
.'

72. From the
Vendidad Sada.

73. The power of resistance to uncleanness follows the value of
the materials: gold, silver, iron, steel, stone, earth, wood,
clay.

XI.

76. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the cow
be made clean that has eaten of the carcass of a dog, or of the
corpse of a man?

77. Ahura Mazda answered: 'She can, O holy Zarathushtra! The priest
shall not, within a year, take from her either milk or cheese
for the libation, nor meat for the libation and the Baresma
. When
a year has passed, then the faithful may eat of her as before
.'

74. [barsom -JHP] The libation waters (Zaothra) are mixed with milk (jîv). The cheese
(or butter) and the meat are elements of the dron as gôshôdâ.

75. 'Whatever comes from her, if dropped, is clean; if taken, unclean.
If she he big with young [pregnant -JHP], the young is born clean, if conceived
before her eating of the corpse; if conceived afterwards, it is
born unclean' (Comm.)

XII.

78. Who is he, O holy Ahura Mazda! who, meaning well and desiring
righteousness, prevents righteousness? Who is he who, meaning
well, falls into the ways of the Druj
?

76. Possibly, 'works for the Druj.'

79. Ahura Mazda answered: 'This one, meaning well and desiring
righteousness, prevents righteousness; this one, meaning well,
falls into the ways of the Druj, who offers up water defiled by
the dead and unfit for libation; or who offers up in the dead
of the night water unfit for libation
.'

77. 'From what hour may sacrifice to the Good Waters be offered? From
sunrise to sunset. . . He who offers up libations to the Good
Waters after sunset, before sunrise, does no better deed than
if he should throw them downright into the jaws of a venomous
snake' (
Nirangistan
, § 48
).

vd7sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 8
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd8sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd8sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: Vendidad: FARGARD 8. Funerals and purification, unlawful sex

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the
Denkard
, Book 8, Chapter 44.42ff

I (1-3). Purification of the house where a man has died.

II (4-13). Funerals.

III (14-22). Purification of the ways along which the corpse has
been carried.

IV (23-25). No clothes to be thrown on a corpse.

V (26-32). Unlawful lusts.

VI (33-34). A corpse when dried up does not contaminate.

VII (35-72). Purification of the man defiled by the dead.

VIII (73-80). Purification of the fire defiled by the dead.

IX (81-96). The Warharan fire.

X (97-107). Purification in the wilderness.

This chapter, putting aside section V, may be entitled; Funerals
and Purification. Logical order may easily be introduced into
it, by arranging the sections as follows: I, IV, II, III, VI, VII,
X, VIII, IX.

FARGARD 8. Funerals and purification, unlawful sex

I

Notes:

1. If a dog or a man die under a hut of wood or a hut of felt

what shall the worshippers of Mazda do
?

1. A movable shelter, by contradistinction to a fixed abode, something
like the oba of the Tartars, one of those huts made of boards
or felt and called thâruma by the Arabs, which served as pavilions
for princes as well as tents for nomads.

2. That sort of abode, having only one room, can have no chamber
for the dead (
Vd5.10
).

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall search for a Dakhma, they
shall look for a Dakhma all around
. If they find it easier to
remove the dead, they shall take out the dead, they shall let
the house stand, and shall perfume it with Urvasna or Vohu-gaona,
or Vohu-kereti, or Hadha-naepata, or any other sweet-smelling
plant
.

3. If there is a Dakhma In the proximity, they remove the corpse
at once. If there is no Dakhma or the season prevents its access,
they purify the hut first.

4. 'So, when a dog or a man dies, the first thing to do is to take
the corpse out (from the house), and to purify the house, inside
and outside, with perfumes burnt on the fire' (Comm.)
See
Vd11.4
. Urvâsna
is the râsan plant, a sort of garlic; Vohû-gaona, Vohû-kereti,
and Hadhâl;-naêpata are respectively (according to Frâmjî)
benzoin, aloe, and pomegranate.

3. 'If they find it easier to remove the house, they shall take
away the house, they shall let the dead lie on the spot, and shall
perfume the house with Urvasna, or Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti,
or Hadha-naepata, or any other sweet-smelling plant.'

II

4. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If in the house
of a worshipper of Mazda a dog or a man happens to die, and it
is raining
, or snowing, or blowing
, or
it is dark, or the day is at its end, when flocks and men lose
their way, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do
?

5. 'No corpse must be taken to the Dakhma when rain is falling,
or threatening. If one is overtaken by rain on the way, if there
be a place to lay it down, they shall lay it down; if there be
none, they must go on and take it to the Dakhma, they must not
retrace their steps.... When arrived at the Dakhma, if they
find it full of water, they may nevertheless lay down the corpse'
(Comm.)

6. If it is the season of rain or snow.
See
Vd5.10 seq.

5. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The place in that house whereof the
ground is the cleanest and the driest, and the least passed through
by flocks and herds, by the fire of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated
bundles of Baresma, and by the faithful;'-

6.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from
the fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated
bundles of Baresma? How far from the faithful?

7.
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty paces from the fire; thirty
paces from the water; thirty paces from the consecrated bundles
of Baresma; three paces from the faithful;-

8. 'On that place they shall dig a grave
, half a foot deep if
the earth be hard, half the height of a man if it be soft
; [they
shall cover the surface of the grave with ashes or cowdung]
; they
shall cover the surface of it with dust of bricks, of stones,
or of dry earth
.

7. This is the case when the house is too small for containing
a special chamber for the dead (as prescribed
Vd5.10
).
Nowadays they dispense even with that grave: the corpse is laid on the
floor, on a slab of marble, by which it is sufficiently isolated
from the ground to prevent its being defiled.

8. Soft earth, being not impervious to liquids, lets contagion
through more easily.

9.
Vendidad Sada
.

10. Substances more impervious.

10. 'And they shall let the lifeless body lie there, for two nights,
or three nights, or a month long, until the birds begin to fly,
the plants to grow, the hidden floods to flow, and the wind to
dry up the earth.

11. §§ 9-10; see
Vd5.12-13
.

10. 'And when the birds begin to fly, the plants to grow, the
hidden floods to flow, and the wind to dry up the earth, then
the worshippers of Mazda shall make a breach in the wall of the
house
, and two men, strong and skillful
,
having stripped their clothes off
, shall take up the body from the
clay or the stones, or from the plastered house
,
and they shall lay it down on a place where they
know there are always corpse-eating dogs and corpse-eating
birds.

12. 'The master and mistress of the house are carried away through
a breach (made in the wall of the house); others through the door'
(Comm.) -- 'The more scrupulous parties have it [the body] removed
by a side, in preference to the usual general entrance' (H. G.
Briggs,
The Parsis
, 1852, p. 50).

13. The corpse-bearers or nasu-kasha (Khândyas). 'The corpse
must be carried by two persons (see
Vd3.13 seq.
),
no matter who they are; they may be a man and a woman, or two women' (Comm.)

14. 'As they are exchanged for the special clothes in which they
carry corpses (Comm.), the so-called jâma-i dakhma, 'the
Dakhma clothes.'

15. The Dahhma (see
Vd6.50 seq.
)

11. 'Afterwards the corpse-bearers shall sit down, three paces
from the dead, and the holy Ratu
shall proclaim to the worshippers
of Mazda thus: "Worshippers of Mazda, let the urine be brought
here wherewith the corpse-bearers there shall wash their hair
and their bodies!"'

16. The priest who directs the funerals, 'the chief of the Nasu-kashas'
(Comm.), the so-called Nasâ-sâlâr.

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
urine wherewith the corpse-bearers shall wash their hair and their
bodies? Is it of sheep or of oxen? Is it of man or of woman?

13. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is of sheep or of oxen; not of man
nor of woman, except a man or a woman who has married the next-of-kin
:
these shall therefore procure the urine wherewith the corpse-bearers
shall wash their hair and their bodies
.'

17. The next-of-kin marriage or Hvaetvadatha (kwetodas) is
one of the good works that Ahriman dreads most
(
Shayest-na shayast 18
;
West,
Pahlavi Texts
, I, 389). 'Ahriman and the demons are
less predominant in the body of him who practises khwetodas' (West,
II, 422). Therefore their maêsma is as powerful as the gomez.

18. 'When back in the village they perform the regular Barashnum
with consecrated gomez' (Comm.)

III

14. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the way,
whereon the carcasses of dogs or corpses of men have been carried,
be passed through again by flocks and herds, by men and women,
by the fire of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of Baresma,
and by the faithful?

15. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It cannot be passed through again by
flocks and herds, nor by men and women, nor by the fire of Ahura
Mazda, nor by the consecrated bundles of Baresma, nor by the faithful
.

19. The way by which the corpse has passed is haunted by the Druj
Nasu: the Drug is expelled from it by the same proceeding as it
was expelled from the dead, by the Sag-did. The Sag-did for the
purification of the way seems to have fallen into desuetude.

16. 'They shall therefore cause a yellow dog with four eyes
, or
a white dog with yellow ears, to go three times through that way
.
When either the yellow dog with four eyes, or the white dog with
yellow ears, is brought there, then the Druj Nasu flies away to
the regions of the north, [in the shape of a raging fly, with
knees and tail sticking out, droning without end, and like unto
the foulest Khrafstras
.]

20. A dog with two spots above the eyes.

21. 'Afrag says, the dog goes straight along the length of the
way; Maidyo-mah says, he goes across it from side to side' (Comm.)

22. See
Vd7.3.

17. 'If the dog goes unwillingly, O Spitama Zarathushtra, they
shall cause the yellow dog with four eyes, or the white dog with
yellow ears, to go six times
through that way. When either the
yellow dog with four eyes, or the white dog with yellow ears,
is brought there, then the Druj Nasu flies away to the regions
of the north, [in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail
sticking out, droning without end, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras.]

23. 'Three times suffice if the dog goes of his, own accord; if
he goes by force, it counts as nothing; if he goes but with reluctance,
that shall suffice' (Comm. ad § 18).

18. 'If the dog goes unwillingly, they shall cause the yellow
dog with four eyes, or the white dog with yellow ears, to go nine
times through that way. When either the yellow dog with four eyes,
or the white dog with yellow ears, has been brought there, then
the Druj Nasu flies away to the regions of the north, [in the
shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail sticking out, droning
without end, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras.]

19. 'An Athravan shall first go along the way and shall say aloud
these victorious words: "
Yatha aha vairyo
: - The will of
the Lord is the law of righteousness.

'"The gifts of Vohu-mano
to the deeds done in this world
for Mazda.

'"He who relieves the poor makes Ahura king.

24. A prayer in frequent use, and considered of great efficacy,
generally known as the Ahuna Vairya or Ahunwar. It was by reciting
it that Ohrmazd in his first conflict with Ahriman drove him back
to hell (
Bund. I
).

25. Of Paradise, as Vohu-mano (Good Thought) is the doorkeeper of
heaven (see
Vd19.31
).

20. '"
Kem-na mazda
:
- What protector hast thou given unto
me, O Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me? Whom
but thy Atar and Vohu-mano
, through whose work I keep on the world
of righteousness? Reveal therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule
!

'"Ke verethrem-ja
: - Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching? Make it clear that I am the guide for both worlds.
May Sraosha come with Vohu-mano and help whomsoever thou pleasest,
O Mazda!

26.
Yasna 46.7
.

27. I have no protection to expect but from my virtue (Vohu-mano,
'Good Thought') and from thy fire, which in the fire ordeal (Var
Nirang) will show my innocence.

28. That is to say, one must take Religion as one's rule.

29.
Yasna 44.16
.
This stanza, which in the original
Gatha
refers
to the human incarnation of Sraosha, that is to say, to king Vishtaspa,
the victorious, protector of the Prophet and his, Religion, is
applied here to the god Sraosha, as a protector of the soul in
its passage from this world to the other (
Vd7.52
).

21. '"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta!
Perish, O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish,
O creation of the fiend! Perish, O world of the fiend! Perish
away, O Druj! Rush away, O Druj! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away
to the regions of the north, never more to give unto death the
living world of Righteousness!"

22. 'Then the worshippers of Mazda may at their will bring by
those ways sheep and oxen, men and women, and Fire, the son of
Ahura Mazda, the consecrated bundles of Baresma, and the faithful.

'The worshippers of Mazda may afterwards
prepare meals with meat
and wine in that house; it shall be clean, and there will be no
sin, as before.'

30. On the fourth day. For three days and nights after the death
it is forbidden to cook meat in the house (Comm.)

IV

23. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw clothes, either of skin or woven, upon a dead body
, enough
to cover the feet, what is the penalty that he shall pay
? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, four
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

31. The dead must be stripped of his clothes, and is exposed on
the heights 'clothed with the light of heaven'
(
Vd6.51
). -- The
modern use is to have him wrapped in a shroud as old and as much
worn out as possible (
Vd5.61
).

32. See
Vd5.60
;
Vd7.20
.

24. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw clothes, either of skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough
to cover both legs, what is the penalty that he shall pay? Ahura
Mazda answered: 'Six hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, six
hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

25. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
throw clothes, either of skin or woven, upon a dead body, enough
to cover the whole body, what is the penalty that he shall pay?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
a thousand stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

V

26.

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man, by
force, commits the unnatural sin [sodomy], what is the penalty that he
shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Eight hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
eight hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

27. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man voluntarily
commits the unnatural sin, what is the penalty for it? What is
the atonement for it? What is the cleansing from it?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'For that deed there is nothing that can
pay, nothing that can atone, nothing that can cleanse from it;
it is a trespass for which there is no atonement, for ever and
ever.'

. When is it so?

'It is so if the sinner be a professor of the Religion of Mazda,
or one who has been taught in it.

'But if he be not a professor of the Religion of Mazda, nor one
who has been taught in it, then his sin is taken from him, if
he makes confession of the Religion of Mazda and resolves never
to commit again such forbidden deeds.

33. See
Vd3.38-42, text and notes
.

29. 'The Religion of Mazda indeed, O Spitama Zarathushtra! takes
away from him who makes confession of it the bonds of his sin;
it takes away (the sin of) breach of trust; it takes away (the
sin of) murdering one of the faithful; it takes away (the sin
of) burying a corpse; it takes away (the sin of) deeds for which
there is no atonement; it takes away the worst sin of usury; it
takes away any sin that may be sinned.

30.
In the same way the Religion of Mazda, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
cleanses the faithful from every evil thought, word, and deed,
as a swift-rushing mighty wind cleanses the plain.

'So let all the deeds he doeth be henceforth good, O Zarathushtra!
a full atonement for his sin is effected by means of the Religion
of Mazda.'

31. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is the man
that is a Daeva? Who is he that is a worshipper of the Daevas?
that is a male paramour of the Daevas? that is a female paramour
of the Daevas? that is a wife to the Daeva
? that is as bad as
a Daeva: that is in his whole being a Daeva? Who is he that is
a Daeva before he dies, and becomes one of the unseen Daevas after
death
?

34. 'As a wife is obedient to her husband, so is he to the Daevas'
(Comm.)

35. Demons are often the restless souls of the wicked, excluded from
heaven. The Persian sect of the Mahabadians, believed that the
soul that had not spoken and done good became an Ahriman or jinn
(
Dabestan
).

32. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The man that lies with mankind as man
lies with womankind, or as woman lies with mankind, is the man
that is a Daeva; this one is the man that is a worshipper of the
Daevas, that is a male paramour of the Daevas, that is a female
paramour of the Daevas, that is a wife to the Daeva; this is the
man that is as bad as a Daeva, that is in his whole being a Daeva;
this is the man that is a Daeva before he dies, and becomes one
of the unseen Daevas after death: so is he, whether he has lain
with mankind as mankind, or as womankind
.'

36. [i.e. the recipient is equally guilty. -JHP]
The guilty may be killed by any one, without an order from
the Dastur (see § 74 n.), and by this execution an ordinary capital
crime may be redeemed (Comm. ad
Vd7.52
).

VI

33. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Shall the man
be clean who has touched a corpse that has been dried up and dead
more than a year
?

37. The corpse, dried up, contains no longer any of the solid and
liquid elements that generate corruption and infection
(see
above, Vd6.50, note 16
).

34. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He shall. The dry mingles not with
the dry
. Should the dry mingle with the dry, how soon all this
material world of mine would be only one Peshotanu, bent on the
destruction of righteousness, and whose soul will cry and wail!
so numberless are the beings that die upon the face of the earth
.'

38. 'This principle still prevails even with Moslem Persians:
'Pour encourir leur immondicité dans l'attouchement des Chrétiens
et autres idolatres, il est nécessaire que s'ils les touchent,
leurs vêtements soient mouillés. C'est à cause,
disent-ils, qu'étans secs l'immondicité ne
s'attache pas; . . . . ce qui est cause que dans
les villes où leurs Mullas et Docteurs ont plus d'autorité, ils font
parfois défendre par leurs Kans que lorsqu'il pleut, les Chrétiens
ne sortent pas de leurs maisons, de crainte que par accident, venans
à les heurter, ils, ne soient rendus immondes' (G. da Chinon, p. 88
seq.; cf. Chardin). Still nowadays, in Persia, the Jews are not
allowed to go out of their house on a rainy day, lest the religious
impurity, conducted through the rain, should pass from the Jew
to the Moslem.

39. See
Vd5.4
.

VII

35.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can the man
be made clean that has touched the corpse of a dog or the corpse
of a man?

36. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He can, O holy Zarathushtra!'

How so?

'If the Nasu has already been expelled by the corpse-eating dogs,
or by the corpse-eating birds, he shall cleanse his body with
gomez and water, and he shall be clean
.

40. If the Sag-did has been performed, a simple ghosel is enough.
See
Vd7.29, notes 27 and 31
.

37. 'If the Nasu has not yet been expelled by the corpse-eating
dogs, or by the corpse-eating birds
, then the worshippers of Mazda
shall dig three holes in the ground
, and he shall thereupon wash
his body with gomez, not with water. They shall then lift and
bring my dog
, they shall bring him (thus shall it be done and
not otherwise) in front [of the man]
.

41. If the Sag-did has not been performed, the Barashnum is necessary.

42. The first three holes, which contain gomez. For the disposition
of the holes, see
the following Fargard
.

43. Three times; every time that the unclean one passes from one hole
to another (Comm. ad IX, 32).

44. To look at him, or, rather, at the Nasu in him, whilst the priest
sings the spells that drive the Nasu.

38. 'The worshippers of Mazda shall dig three other holes
in the
ground, and he shall thereupon wash his body with gomez, not with
water. They shall then lift and bring my dog, they shall bring
him (thus shall it be done and not otherwise) in front [of the
man]. Then shall they wait until he is dried
even to the last
hair on the top of his head.

45. Containing gomez too.

46. He rubs himself dry with handfuls of dust
(see
Vd9.29 seq.
)

39. 'They shall dig three more holes
in the ground, three paces
away from the preceding, and he shall thereupon wash his body
with water
, not with gomez.

47. Containing water.

48. As a master does not take away the dunghill from his house with
his own hands, but has it taken away by his servants, so the water,
being of higher dignity than the gomez, has the worst of the impurity
taken by the gomez, and intervenes only when there is nothing
left that can attain it (
Abalish
, tr. Barthelemy, ch. V and note
29).

40. 'He shall first wash his hands; if his hands be not first
washed, he makes the whole of his body unclean. When he has washed
his hands three times, after his hands have been washed, thou
shalt sprinkle with water
the forepart of his skull
.'

49. The water is shed from a spoon, tied to a long stick, 'the stick
with nine knots' (
Vd9.14
).

50. Bareshnum; from which word the whole of the operation has taken
its name.

41. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the forepart of the skull, whereon does the Druj
Nasu rush
?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'In front, between the brows, the Druj Nasu
rushes.'

51. The Nasu is expelled symmetrically, from limb to limb, from the
right side of the body to the left, from the forepart to the back
parts, and she flies, thus pursued, downwards from the top of
the head to the tips of the toes. The retreating order of the
Nasu is just the reverse of the order in which she invaded the
different members of the first man: she entered Gayomard by the
little toe of the left foot, then went up to the heart, then to
the shoulder, at last to the summit of the head (
Gr. Bund.
) Death
still seizes the foot first.

42. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach in front, between the brows, whereon does the Druj
Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'On the back part of the skull the Druj
Nasu rushes.'

43.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the back part of the skull, whereon does the Druj
Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'In front, on the jaws, the Druj Nasu rushes.'

44.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach in front, on the jaws, whereon does the Druj Nasu
rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right ear the Druj Nasu rushes.'

45.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right ear, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left ear the Druj Nasu rushes.'

46.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left ear, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right shoulder the Druj Nasu rushes.'

47.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right shoulder, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left shoulder the Druj Nasu rushes.'

48.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left shoulder, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right arm-pit the Druj Nasu rushes.'

49.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right arm-pit, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left arm-pit the Druj Nasu rushes.'

50.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left arm-pit, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'In front, upon the chest, the Druj Nasu
rushes.'

51.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the chest in front, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the back the Druj Nasu rushes.'

52.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the back, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right nipple the Druj Nasu rushes.'

53.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right nipple, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left nipple the Druj Nasu rushes.'

54.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left nipple, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right rib the Druj Nasu rushes.'

55.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right rib, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left rib the Druj Nasu rushes.'

56.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left rib, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right hip the Druj Nasu rushes.'

57.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right hip, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left hip the Druj Nasu rushes.'

58.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left hip, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the sexual parts the Druj Nasu rushes.
If the unclean one be a man, thou shalt sprinkle him first behind,
then before; if the unclean one be a woman, thou shalt sprinkle
her first before, then behind.'

59.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the sexual parts, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right thigh the Druj Nasu rushes.'

60.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right thigh, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left thigh the Druj Nasu rushes.'

61.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left thigh, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right knee the Druj Nasu rushes.'

62.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right knee, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left knee the Druj Nasu rushes.'

63.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left knee, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right leg the Druj Nasu rushes.'

64.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right leg, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left leg the Druj Nasu rushes.'

65.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left leg, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right ankle the Druj Nasu rushes.'

66.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right ankle, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left ankle the Druj Nasu rushes.'

67.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left ankle, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the right instep the Druj Nasu rushes.'

68.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the right instep, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Upon the left instep the Druj Nasu rushes.'

69.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When the good
waters reach the left instep, whereon does the Druj Nasu rush?
Ahura Mazda answered: 'She turns round under the sole of the foot;
it looks like the wing of a fly.

70.
'He shall press his toes upon the ground, and shall raise
up his heels; thou shalt sprinkle his right sole with water; then
the Druj Nasu rushes upon the left sole. Thou shalt sprinkle the
left sole with water; then the Druj Nasu turns round under the
toes; it looks like the wing of a fly.

71.
'He shall press his heels upon the ground, and shall raise
up his toes; thou shalt sprinkle his right toe with water; then
the Druj Nasu rushes upon the left toe. Thou shalt sprinkle the
left toe with water; then the Druj Nasu flies away to the regions
of the north, in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and tail
sticking out, droning without end, and like unto the foulest Khrafstras.

[72. 'And thou shalt say aloud these victorious, most healing words:

'"
The will of the Lord is the law of holiness," etc.

[(
Exorcism:
)]

'"What protector hast thou given unto me, O Mazda! while
the hate of the wicked encompasses me?" &c.

'"Who is the victorious who will protect thy teaching?"
&c.

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta!

Perish, O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish,

O creation of the fiend! Perish O world of the fiend! Perish away,
O Druj! Rush away, O Druj! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away to
the regions of the north, never more to give unto death the living
world of Righteousness
!"']

52. As in §§ 19, 20.

53. From the Vendidad Sada; cf. § 21.

VIII

73. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda, walking, or running, or riding, or driving, come upon
a Nasu-burning fire, whereon Nasu is being burnt or cooked
, what
shall they do?

54. For food. See
Vd7.23-24
. [Cannibalism -JHP]

74. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall kill the man that cooks
the Nasu; surely they shall kill him
. They shall take off the
cauldron, they shall take off the tripod.

55. 'He who burns Nasu (dead matter) must be killed. Burning or
cooking Nasu from the dead is a capital crime. . . . Four men
can be put to death by any one without an order from the Dastur:
the Nasu-burner, the highwayman, the Sodomite, and the criminal
taken in the deed' (Comm.)

75. 'Then they shall kindle wood from that fire; either wood of
those trees that have the seed of fire in them, or bundles of
the very wood that was prepared for that fire; then they shall
take it farther and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner
.

56. A new fire is kindled from the Nasu-burning fire: this new
fire is disposed in such a way that it should die out soon: before
it has died out, they kindle a new fire from it and so on for
nine times: the ninth fire, derived from the one impure,
through seven intermediate fires, more and more distant from the
original impurity, will represent the fire in its native purity
and can enter into the composition of a Warharan fire. -- On the
modern process, see Dosabhoy Framji,
History of the Parsis
, II, 113.

76. 'Thus they shall lay a first bundle on the ground
, a Vitasti

away from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther
and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

57. In a hole dug for that purpose; such is at least the custom
nowadays. The ceremony is thus made an imitation of the barashnom.
The unclean fire, represented by the nine bundles, passes through
the nine holes, as the unclean man does (see above, § 37 seq.
and
Vd9.12 seq.
), and leaves at each of
them some of the uncleanness it has contracted.

58. A span of twelve fingers.

77. 'They shall lay down a second bundle on the ground, a Vitasti
away from the Nasu-burning fire: then they shall take it farther
and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

'They shall lay down a third bundle on the ground, a Vitasti away
from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther and
disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

'They shall lay down a fourth bundle on the ground, a Vitasti
away from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther
and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

'They shall lay down a fifth bundle on the ground, a Vitasti away
from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther and
disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

'They shall lay down a sixth bundle on the ground, a Vitasti away
from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther and
disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

'They shall lay down a seventh bundle on the ground, a Vitasti
away from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther
and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

They shall lay down an eighth bundle on the ground, a Vitasti
away from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther
and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

78.
'They shall lay down a ninth bundle on the ground, a Vitasti
away from the Nasu-burning fire; then they shall take it farther
and disperse it, that it may die out the sooner.

79.
'If a man shall then piously bring unto the fire, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! wood of Urvasna, or Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti,
or Hadha-naepata, or any other sweet-smelling wood;

80. 'Wheresoever the wind shall bring the perfume of the fire,
thereunto the fire of Ahura Mazda shall go and kill thousands
of unseen Daevas, thousands of fiends, the brood of darkness,
thousands of couples of Yatus and Pairikas
.'

58. It will have all the power of the Warharan fire.

IX

81. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
a Nasu-burning fire to the Daityo-gatu
, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought ten thousand fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

59. 'The proper abode,' the Warharan fire. The Warharan fire is
composed of a thousand and one fires belonging to sixteen different
classes (ninety-one corpse-burning fires,' eighty dyers' fires,
&c.) As the earthly representative of the heavenly fire,
it is the sacred centre to which every earthly fire longs to return,
in order to be united again, as much as possible, with its native
abode. The more it has been defiled by worldly uses, the greater is the
merit acquired by freeing it from defilement.

82. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire wherein impure liquid has been burnt
,
what shall be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought a thousand fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.

60. The hêhr, that is to say all sort of impurity that comes from
the body.

83. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire wherein dung has been burnt
, what
shall be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought five hundred fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

61. 'The fire of a bath,' according to Framji; the use of the bath
was prohibited; according to Josuah the Stylite (ch. XX, tr. Martin),
king Balash (484-488) was overthrown by the Magi for having built
bath houses. The reason of this prohibition was probably that
it entailed the defilement of the fire, as they were warmed with
cow dung.

84. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from the kiln of a potter, what shall
be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought four hundred fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

85. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from a glazier's kiln, what shall
be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought to the Daityo-gatu as many fire-brands as
there were glasses [brought to that fire]
.'

62. Doubtful.

86. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from the aonya paro-berejya, what
shall be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought to the Daityo-gatu as many fire-brands as
there were plants
.'

63. Meaning unknown. Perhaps a fire for burning weeds.

87. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from under the puncheon of a goldsmith,
what shall be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought a hundred fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

88.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from under the puncheon of a silversmith,
what shall be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought ninety fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

89.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from under the puncheon of a blacksmith,
what shall be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought eighty fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

90. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! It a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from under the puncheon of a worker
in steel, what shall be his reward when his soul has parted with
his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought seventy fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

91. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire of an oven
, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted from his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought sixty fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

64. A baker's fire.

92. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from under a cauldron
, what shall
be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as it he had,
here below, brought fifty fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

65. The kitchen-fire.

93. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire from an aonya takhairya
, what shall
be his reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought forty fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

66. Meaning unknown.

94. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
a herdsman's fire to the Daityo-gatu, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought thirty fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire of the field
, what shall be his reward
when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought twenty fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.']

67. From the
Vendidad Sada
.

68. The hunter's fire, an encampment's fire.

96. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man bring
to the Daityo-gatu the fire of his own hearth
, what shall be his
reward when his soul has parted with his body?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'His reward shall be the same as if he had,
here below, brought ten fire-brands to the Daityo-gatu.'

69. By which one warms one's self; the fire least exposed to uncleanness.

X

97. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Can a man be
made clean, O holy Ahura Mazda! who has touched a corpse in a
distant place in the wilderness
?

70. Where the regular process or purification cannot be performed.
-- The Pahlavi Commentary to this chapter will be found in West,

Pahlavi Texts
, II, p. 455
.

98. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He can, O holy Zarathushtra.'

How so?

'If the Nasu has already been expelled by the corpse-eating dogs
or the corpse-eating birds, he shall wash his body with gomez;
he shall wash it thirty times, he shall rub it dry with the hand
thirty times, beginning every time with the head
.

71. Perhaps better: 'this is as good as the chief purification' (that
is to say as a regular Barashnom). -- If the Sag-did has been 'performed,
the Sî-shû (thirty-fold washing) is enough. Cf. above,
§§ 35, 36.

99. 'If the Nasu has not yet been expelled by the corpse-eating
dogs or the corpse-eating birds, he shall wash his body with gomez;
he shall wash it fifteen times, he shall rub it dry with the hand
fifteen times
.

72. If the Sag-did has not been performed, he cleanses himself in
a summary way till he comes to a place where the Barashnom can
be performed.

100. 'Then he shall run a distance of a Hathra
. He shall run until
he meets some man on his way, and he shall cry out aloud: "Here
am I, one who has touched the corpse of a man, and who is powerless
in mind, powerless in tongue, powerless in hand
. Do make me clean."
Thus shall he run until he overtakes the man. If the man will
not cleanse him, he remits him the third of his trespass
.

72. See
Bund. 26, note 1
.

73. On account of my uncleanness, I am armêsht, excluded from active
life and unfit for any work.

74. As he takes it upon his own head.

101. 'Then he shall run another Hathra, he shall run off again
until he overtakes a man; if the man will not cleanse him, he
remits him the half of his trespass
.

75. The half of the remnant, that is the second third.

102. 'Then he shall run a third Hathra, he shall run off a third
time until he overtakes a man; if the man will not cleanse him,
he remits him the whole of his trespass.

103. 'Thus shall he run forwards until he comes near a house, a
borough, a town, an inhabited district, and he shall cry out with
a loud voice: "Here am I, one who has touched the corpse
of a man, and who is powerless in mind, powerless in tongue, powerless
in hand. Do make me clean." If they will not cleanse him,
he shall cleanse his body with gomez and water; thus shall he
be clean
.'

76. 'He may then attend to his business; he may work and fill; some
say he must abstain from sacrifice (till he has undergone the
Barashnom)' (Comm.)

104. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If he find water
on his way and the water make him subject to a penalty
, what is
the penalty that he shall pay?

77. As he defiled it by crossing it.

105. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
four hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

106. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If he find trees

on his way and the fire make him subject to a penalty, what is
the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Four hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
four hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.

78. 'Trees fit for the fire' (Comm.) If he touches those trees,
the fire to which they are brought becomes unclean by his fault.

107. 'This is the penalty, this is the atonement which saves the
faithful man who submits to it, not him who does not submit to
it.

Such a one shall surely be an inhabitant in the mansion of the
Druj
.'

79. Hell. Imitated from
Yasna 49.11d
.
See
Vd14.18.

vd8sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 9
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd9sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd9sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: Vendidad: FARGARD 9. The Nine Nights' Barashnum.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

On the name Barashnom, see
Vd8.40, note 50
.

I a (1-11). Description of the place for cleansing the unclean
(the Barashnom-gah).

I b (12-36) Description of the cleansing.

II (37-44). Fees of the cleanser.

III (47-57). The false cleanser; his punishment.

§§ 45, 46 belong better to the
following Fargard
.

The ceremony described in this Fargard is known among the Parsis
as barashnom no shaba, or 'nine nights' Barashnom,' because it
lasts for nine nights (see § 35). It is the great purification,
the most efficacious of all; it not only makes the defiled man
clean, but it opens to him the heavens
(see
Vd19.33
). So,
although it was formerly intended only for the man defiled by
the dead, it became, during the Parsi period, a pious work which
might be performed without any corpse having been touched; nay,
its performance was prescribed, once at least, at the time of
the Nû zûdî [Navjote -JHP]
(at the age of fifteen, when the young Parsi becomes
a member of the community), in order to wash away the natural
uncleanness that has been contracted in the maternal womb
(
Saddar 36
). It must also be undergone by a priest who wants to appear
before the Warharan fire or perform the Yasna or the Vendidad
office.

FARGARD 9. The Nine Nights' Barashnum.

Ia.

Notes:

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: O most beneficent Spirit,
Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! To whom shall they
apply here below, who want to cleanse their body defiled by the
dead?'

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'To a pious man
, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
who knows how to speak, who speaks truth, who has learned the
Holy Word [manthra], who is pious, and knows best the rites of cleansing
according to the law of Mazda. That man shall fell the trees off
the surface of the ground on a space of nine Vibazus
square;

1. A priest.

2. Nine ells (?). See
Vd7.34
.

3. 'in that part of the ground where there is least water and
where there are fewest trees, the part which is the cleanest and
driest, and the least passed through by sheep and oxen, and by
the fire of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of Baresma,
and by the faithful.'

4.
How far from the fire? How far from the water? How far from
the consecrated bundles of Baresma? How far from the faithful?

5.
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thirty paces from the fire, thirty
paces from the water, thirty paces from the consecrated bundles
of Baresma, three paces from the faithful.

6. 'Then thou shalt dig a hole
, two fingers deep if the summer
has come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

3. Those holes are intended to receive the liquid trickling from
the body. In summer, the air and the earth being dry the hole
may be less deep, as it is certain that it will be empty and will
have room enough for that liquid.

7. 'Thou shalt dig a second hole, two fingers deep if the summer
has come, four fingers deep if the winter end ice have come.

'Thou shalt dig a third hole, two fingers deep if the summer has
come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

'Thou shalt dig a fourth hole, two fingers deep if the summer
has come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

'Thou shalt dig a fifth hole, two fingers deep if the summer has
come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

'Thou shalt dig a sixth hole
, two fingers deep if the summer has
come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.'

4. These six holes contain gomez. 'The holes must be dug from the
north to the south' (Comm.)

8. How far from one another?

'One pace.'

How much is the pace?

'As much as three feet.

9. 'Then thou shalt dig three holes more
, two fingers deep if
the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have
come.'

How far from the former six?

'Three paces.'

What sort of paces?

'Such as are taken in walking.'

How much are those (three) paces?

'As much as nine feet.

5. The three holes to contain water.

10. 'Then thou shalt draw a furrow all around with a metal knife.'

How far from the holes?

'Three paces.'

What sort of paces?

'Such as are taken in walking.'

How much are those (three) paces?

'As much as nine feet.

11. 'Then thou shalt draw twelve furrows
; three of which thou
shalt draw to surround and divided [from the rest] (the first)
three holes; three thou shalt draw to surround and divide (the
first) six holes; three thou shalt draw to surround and divide
the nine holes; three thou shalt draw around the [three] inferior
holes, outside the [six other] holes
. At each of the three times
nine feet
, thou shalt place stones as steps to the holes; or potsherds,
or stumps
, or clods, or any hard matter
.'

6. 'The furrows must be drawn during the day; they must be drawn
with a knife; they must be drawn with recitation of spells. While
drawing the furrows the cleanser recites three

Ashem vohus
("holiness
is the best of all good," &c.), the

Fravarânê
("I declare
myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower or Zarathushtra,
a foe of the fiend," &c.), the

Khshnuman of Srosh
, and the
Srosh Baj
;
they must be drawn from the north' (Comm. ad § 32). The furrow,
or kesh, plays a greater part in the Mazdean liturgy than in any
other. By means of the furrow, drawn with
proper spells, and according to the laws of spiritual war, man
either besieges the fiend or intrenches himself against him
(See
Vd17.5
) In the present case the
Druj, being shut up inside the kesh and thus excluded from the
world outside, and being driven back, step by step, by the strength
of the holy water and spells, finds at last no place of refuge but hell.

7. 'The three holes for water, the six holes for gomez' (Comm.)

8. The nine feet between the holes containing gomez and those containing
water, the nine feet between the first holes and the furrows;
and the nine feet between the last hole and the furrows.

9. Dâdara.

10. That the foot of the unclean one may not touch the earth.

Ib.

12. 'Then the man defiled shall walk to the holes; thou, O Zarathushtra!
shalt stand outside by the furrow, and thou shalt recite,

Nemascha ya armaitish izhacha
; and the man defiled shall repeat,

Nemascha ya armaitish izhacha.

11.
Yasna 49.10c
.

13. 'The Druj becomes weaker and weaker at every one of those
words which are a weapon to smite the fiend Angra Mainyu, to smite
Aeshma of the murderous spear
, to smite the
Mazainya fiends
, to smite all the fiends.

12. See
Vd10.13
.

13. See
Vd10.16
.

14. 'Then thou shalt take for the gomez a spoon of iron
or of
lead. When thou takest a stick with nine knots
,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! to sprinkle (the gomez) from that spoon,
thou shalt fasten the spoon to the end of the stick.

13b. Dar: brass. -JHP

14. So long that the cleanser may take gomez or water from the holes
and sprinkle the unclean one, without touching him and without going
inside the furrows.

15. 'They shall wash his hands first. If his hands be not washed
first, he makes his whole body unclean. When he has washed his
hands three times, after his hands have been washed, thou shalt
sprinkle the forepart of his skull
; then the Druj Nasu rushes
in front, between his brows
.

15. With gomez at the first six holes, with water at the next three.

16. See
Vd8.40-71
.

16. Thou shalt sprinkle him in front between the brows; then the
Druj Nasu rushes upon the back part of the skull.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the back part of the skull; then the Druj
Nasu rushes upon the jaws.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the jaws; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon
the right ear.

17.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the right ear; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left ear.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left ear; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon
the right shoulder.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right shoulder; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left shoulder.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left shoulder; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the right arm-pit.

18.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the right arm-pit; then the Druj Nasu
rushes upon the left arm-pit.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left arm-pit; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the chest.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the chest; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon
the back.

19.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the back; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon
the right nipple.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right nipple; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left nipple.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left nipple; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the right rib.

20.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the right rib; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left rib.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left rib; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon
the right hip.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right hip; then the Druj Nasu rushes
'upon the left hip.

21.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the left hip; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the sexual parts.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the sexual parts. If the unclean one be a
man, thou shalt sprinkle him first behind, then before; if the
unclean one be a woman, thou shalt sprinkle her first before,
then behind; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon the right thigh.

22.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the right thigh; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left thigh.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left thigh; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the right knee.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right knee; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left knee.

23.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the left knee; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the right leg.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right leg; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left leg.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left leg; then the Druj Nasu rushes upon
the right ankle.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right ankle; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left ankle.

24.
'Thou shalt sprinkle the left ankle; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the right instep.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the right instep; then the Druj Nasu rushes
upon the left instep.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left instep; then the Druj Nasu turns
round under the sole of the foot; it looks like the wing of a
fly.

25.
'He shall press his toes upon the ground and shall raise up
his heels; thou shalt sprinkle his right sole; then the Druj Nasu
rushes upon the left sole.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left sole; then the Druj Nasu turns round
under the toes; it looks like the wing of a fly.

26.
'He shall press his heels upon the ground and shall raise
up his toes; thou shalt sprinkle his right toe; then the Druj
Nasu rushes upon the left toe.

'Thou shalt sprinkle the left toe; then the Druj Nasu flies away
to the regions of the north, in the shape of a raging fly, with
knees and tail sticking out, droning without end, and like unto
the foulest Khrafstras.

27. 'And thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words:
'"
Yatha ahu vairyo:
-
The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness.

'"The gifts of Vohu-mano to deeds done in this world for
Mazda.

'"He who relieves the poor makes Ahura king.

'"
Kem-na mazda:
- What protector hadst thou given unto me,
O Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me? Whom, but
thy Atar and Vohu-mano, through whose work I keep on the world
of Righteousness? Reveal therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule!

'"Ke verethrem-ja: - Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching? Make it clear that I am the guide for both worlds.
May Sraosha come with Vohu-mano and help whomsoever thou pleasest,
O Mazda!

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world
of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj! Rush away, O Druj! Perish away,
O Druj! Perish away to the regions of the north, never more to
give unto death the living world of Righteousness
"

17. See
Vd8.19-21
.

28. 'At the first hole the man becomes freer from the Nasu; then
thou shalt say those victorious, most healing words: - "Yatha
ahu vairyo." &c.

'At the second hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou
shalt say those victorious, most healing words: - "Yatha
ahu vairyo," &c.

'At the third hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt
say those victorious, most healing words: - "Yatha
ahu vairyo," &c.

'At the fourth hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou
shalt say those victorious, most healing words: -
"Yatha ahu vairyo," &c.

'At the fifth hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt
say those victorious, most healing words: -
"Yatha ahu vairyo," &c.

'At the sixth hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt
say those victorious, most healing words: - "Yatha ahu vairyo,"
&c.

18. As in preceding clause.

29. 'Afterwards the man defiled shall sit down, inside the furrows
,
outside the furrows of the six holes, four fingers from those
furrows. There he shall cleanse his body with thick handfuls of
dust.

19. Between the furrows of the six holes containing gomez and
the furrows of the holes containing water.

30. 'Fifteen times shall they take up dust from the ground for
him to rub his body, and they shall wait there until he is dry
even to the last hair on his head.

31.
'When his body is dry with dust, then he shall step over the
holes (containing water). At the first hole he shall wash his
body once with water; at the second hole he shall wash his body
twice with water; at the third hole he shall wash his body thrice
with water.

32.
'Then he shall perfume (his body) with Urvasna, or Vohu-gaona,
or Vohu-kereti, or Hadha-naepata, or any other sweet-smelling
plant; then he shall put on his clothes, and shall go back to
his house.

33. 'He shall sit down there in the place of infirmity
, inside
the house, apart from the other worshippers of Mazda. He shall
not go near the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth,
nor near the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, either
man or woman. Thus shall he continue until three nights have passed.
When three nights have passed, he shall wash his body, he shall
wash his clothes with gomez and water to make them clean.

20. The Armêsht-gah (see
Vd5.59, note 70
).

34. 'Then he shall sit down again in the place of infirmity, inside
the house, apart from the other worshippers of Mazda. He shall
not go near the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth,
nor near the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, either
man or woman. Thus shall he continue until six nights have passed.
When six nights have passed, he shall wash his body, he shall
wash his clothes with gomez and water to make them clean.

35.
'Then he shall sit down again in the place of infirmity, inside
the house, apart from the other worshippers of Mazda. He shall
not go near the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth,
nor near the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, either
man or woman. Thus shall he continue, until nine nights have passed.
When nine nights have passed, he shall wash his body, he shall
wash his clothes with gomez and water to make them clean.

36.
'He may thenceforth go near the fire, near the water, near
the earth, near the cow, near the trees, and near the faithful,
either man or woman.

II

37. 'Thou shalt cleanse a priest for a blessing of the just
.

'Thou shalt cleanse the lord of a province for the value of a
camel of high value.

'Thou shalt cleanse the lord of a town for the value of a stallion
of high value.

'Thou shalt cleanse the lord of a borough for the value of a bull
of high value.

'Thou shalt cleanse the master of a house for the value of a cow
three years old.

21. Cf. the tariff for the fees or physicians,

Vd7.41-43
.

22. See
Vd7.41, note 43.

38. 'Thou shalt cleanse the wife of the master of a house for
the value of a ploughing
cow.

'Thou shalt cleanse a menial for the value of a draught cow.

'Thou shalt cleanse a young child for the value of a lamb.

23. Doubtful.

39. 'These are the heads of cattle -- flocks or herds -- that the
worshippers of Mazda shall give to the man who has cleansed them,
if they can afford it; if they cannot afford it, they shall give
him any other value that may make him leave their houses well
pleased with them, and free from anger.

40.
'For if the man who has cleansed them leave their houses displeased
with them, and full of anger, then the Druj Nasu enters them from
the nose [of the dead], from the eyes, from the tongue, from the
jaws, from the sexual organs, from the hinder parts.

41.
'And the Druj Nasu rushes upon them even to the end of the
nails, and they are unclean thenceforth for ever and ever.

'It grieves the sun indeed, O Spitama Zarathushtra! to shine upon
a man defiled by the dead; it grieves the moon, it grieves the
stars.

42.
'That man delights them, O Spitama Zarathushtra! who cleanses
from the Nasu the man defiled by the dead; he delights the fire,
he delights the water, he delights the earth, he delights the
cow, he delights the trees, he delights the faithful, both men
and women.'

43.
Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the material world,
thou Holy One! What shall be his reward, after his soul has parted
from his body, who has cleansed from the Nasu the man defiled
by the dead?'

44. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The welfare
of Paradise thou canst
promise to that man, for his reward in the other world.'

24. Literally, 'the grease.'

24. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the material world,
thou Holy One! How shall I fight against that Druj who from the
dead rushes upon the living? How shall I fight against that Nasu
who from the dead defiles the living?'

25. This clause and the following one as far as 'and the Druj shall
fly away' are further developed in
the following Fargard
.

46. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Say aloud those words in the Gathas
that are to be said twice
.

'Say aloud those words in the Gathas that are to be said thrice
.

'Say aloud those words in the Gathas that are to be said four
times
.

'And the Druj shall fly away like the well-darted arrow, like
the felt of last year
, like the annual garment
of the earth.'

26. The
Bish-âmrûta
formulas,
the
Thrish-âmrûta
formulas, and
the
Chathrush-âmrûta
formulas respectively.
These are enumerated in

the following Fargard
.

27. The felt of an oba made for a season (?).
See
Vd8.1
.

28. The grass.

III.

47.
O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man who
does not know the rites of cleansing according to the law of Mazda,
offers to cleanse the unclean, how shall I then fight against
that Druj who from the dead rushes upon the living? How shall
I fight against that Druj who from the dead defiles the living?

48. Ahura Mazda answered : 'Then, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the
Druj Nasu appears to wax stronger than she was before. Stronger
then are sickness and death and the working of the fiend than
they were before
.'

29. The plague and contagion are stronger than ever.

49. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the
penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'The worshippers of Mazda shall bind him;
they shall bind his hands first; then they shall strip him of
his clothes, they shall cut the head off his neck, and they shall
give over his corpse unto the greediest of the corpse-eating creatures
made by the beneficent Spirit, unto the vultures, with these words
:
-

'"The man here has repented of all his evil thoughts, words,
and deeds.

30. 'The cleanser who has not performed the cleansing according
to the rites, shall he taken to a desert place; there they shall
nail him with four nails, they shall take off the skin from his
body, and cut off his head. If he has performed Patet for his
sin, he shall be holy (that is, he shall go to Paradise); if he
has not performed Patet, he shall stay in hell till the day of
resurrection' (
Fraser Ravâet
, p. 398).
See
Vd3.20-21 and note 29
.

50. '"If he has committed any other evil deed, it is remitted
by his repentance; if he has committed no other evil deed, he
is absolved by his repentance for ever and ever
."'

31. See
Vd3.20 seq
.

51. Who is he, O Ahura Mazda! who threatens to take away fullness
and increase from the world, and to bring in sickness and death?

52. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the ungodly Ashemaogha
, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! who in this material world cleanses the unclean
without knowing the rites of cleansing according to the law of
Mazda.

32. [Ashmogh. -JHP] See
Vd5.35
.

53. 'For until then, O Spitama Zarathushtra! sweetness and fatness
would flow out from that land and from those fields, with health
and healing, with fullness and increase and growth, and a growing
of corn and grass
.'

33. See
Vd13.52 seq.

The false cleanser is punished as would be
a man who would introduce an epidemic. He undergoes the same penalty
as the êvak-bar, but with none of the mitigation allowed in the
case of the latter, on account of the sacrilegious character of
his usurpation.

54. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When are sweetness
and fatness to come back again to that land and to those fields,
with health and healing, with fullness and increase and growth,
and a growing of corn and grass?

55, 56. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Sweetness and fatness will never come
back again to that land and to those fields, with health and healing,
with fullness and increase and growth, and a growing of corn and
grass, until that ungodly Ashemaogha has been smitten to death
on the spot, and the holy Sraosha of that place has been offered
up a sacrifice
, for three days and three nights, with fire blazing,
with Baresma tied up, and with Haoma prepared.

34. The sadis sacrifice, that is to say, the sacrifice that is offered
up to Sraosha for three days and three nights after the death
of a man for the salvation of his soul.

57. 'Then sweetness
and fatness will come back again to that land and to those fields,
with health and healing, with fullness and increase and growth,
and a growing of corn and grass.'

vd9sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 10
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd10sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd10sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 10. Formulas recited during the process of cleansing.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jun 15, 2001.

,
American Edition, (New York, The Christian Literature Company, 1898.)

Comments in [] by JHP.

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the Denkard, Dk Book 8 chap. 44:

Nowadays, before laying the dead in the coffin, two priests recite
the
Ahunavaiti Gatha (Yasna 28-34)
:
it is the so-called Gâh sârnâ (chanting of the Gathas:
gâthâo srâvayêiti).
From
the following Fargard

it appears that formerly all the
five
Gathas
and the
Yasna Haptanghaiti

were recited. Certain stanzas
were recited several times and with a certain emphasis (framrava):
and they were followed with certain spells. The object of this
Fargard is to show which are those stanza; how many times each
was recited, and to give the corresponding spells.

FARGARD 10. Formulas recited during the process of cleansing

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda! most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall
I fight against that Druj who from the dead rushes upon the living?
How shall I fight against that Druj who from the dead defiles
the living?'

Notes:

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Say aloud those words in the Gathas
that are to be said twice
.

'Say aloud those words in the Gathas that are to be said thrice
.

'Say aloud those words in the Gathas that are to be said four
times
.'

1. The so-called Bish-âmrûta.

2. The Thrish-âmrûta.

3. The Chathrush-âmrûta.

3. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which are those
words in the Gathas that are to be said twice?

4. Ahura Mazda answered: 'These are the words in the Gathas that
are to be said twice, and thou shalt twice say them aloud
:-

ahya yasa ... urvanem (Y28.2).

-----

humatenam ... mahi (Y35.2),

ashahya aad saire ... ahubya (Y35.8),

yatha tu i ... ahura (Y39.4),

humaim thwa ... hudaustema (Y41.3),

thwoi staotaraska ... ahura (Y41.5).

-----

usta ahmai ... manangho (Y43.1),

spenta mainyu ... ahuro (Y47.1),

vohu khshathrem ... vareshane (Y51.1),

vahista istis ... skyaothanaka (Y53.1).

4. The Bish-âmrûta are the opening stanzas of the five Gathas
and five stanzas in the
Yasna Haptanghaiti
.

5. 'And after thou hast twice said those Bis-amrutas, thou shalt
say aloud these victorious, most healing words:-

'"I drive away Angra Mainyu
from this house, from this borough,
from this town, from this land; from the very body of the man
defiled by the dead, from the very body of the woman defiled by
the dead; from the master of the house, from the lord of the borough,
from the lord of the town, from the lord of the land; from the
whole of the world of Righteousness.

5. The chief demon, the Daeva of the Daevas.

6. '"I drive away the Nasu
, I drive away direct defilement,
I drive away indirect defilement, from this house, from this borough,
from this town, from this land; from the very body of the man
defiled by the dead, from the very body of the woman defiled by
the dead; from the master of the house, from the lord of the borough,
from the lord of the town, from the lord of the land; from the
whole of the world of Righteousness."'

6. The very demon with whom one has to do in the present case.

7. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which are those
words in the Gathas that are to be said thrice?

8.
Ahura Mazda answered: 'These are the words in the Gathas that
are to be said thrice, and thou shalt thrice say them aloud:-

ashem vohu ... (Y27.14),

ye sevisto ... paitî (Y33.11),

hukhshathrotemai ... vahistai (Y35.5),

duzvarenais ... vahyo (Y53.9).

9. 'After thou hast thrice said those Thris-amrutas, thou shalt
say aloud these victorious, most healing words:-

'"I drive away Indra, I drive away Sauru, I drive away
the daeva Naunghaithya,
from this house, from this borough, from
this town, from this land; from the very body of the man defiled
by the dead, from the very body of the woman defiled by the dead;
from the master of the house, from the lord of the borough, from
the lord of the town, from the lord of the land; from the whole
of the world of Righteousness.

7. Indra, Sauru, Naunghaithya, Tauru, and Zairi are (with Akemmano [Akoman],
here replaced by the Nasu), the six chief demons, and stand to
the Amesha Spentas in the same relation as Angra Mainyu to Spenta
Mainyu. Indra opposes Asha Vahishta and turns men's hearts from
good works; Sauru opposes Khshathra Vairya, he presides over bad
government; Naunghaithya opposes Spenta Armaiti, he is the demon
of discontent; Tauru and Zairi oppose Haurvatat and Ameretat and
poison the waters and the plants. -- Akem-mano, Bad Thought, opposes
Vohu-mano, Good Thought.

10.
'"I drive away Tauru
, I drive away Zairi
, from this
house, from this borough, from this town, from this land; from
the very body of the man defiled by the dead, from the very body
of the woman defiled by the dead; from the master of the house,
from the lord of the borough, from the lord of the town, from
the lord of the land; from the whole of the holy world."'

11. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which are those
words in the Gathas that are to be said four times?

12. Ahura Mazda answered: 'These are the words in the Gathas that
are to be said four times, and thou shalt four times say them
aloud:-

yatha ahu vairyo ...
(Y27.13),

mazda ad moi ... dau ahum
(Y34.15),

a airyama ishyo ... masata mazdau
(Y54.1).

8. Translated in
Vd8.19
.

9. Translated in
Vd11.14
.

10. Translated in
Vd20.11
;
see
Vd11.7
.

13. 'After thou hast said those Chathrus-amrutas four times, thou
shalt say aloud these victorious, most healing words:-

'"I drive away Aeshma, the fiend of the murderous spear
,
I drive away the daeva Akatasha
, from this house, from this borough,
from this town, from this land; from the very body of the man
defiled by the dead, from the very body of the woman defiled by
the dead; from the master of the house, from the lord of the borough,
from the lord of the town, from the lord of the land; from the
whole of the world of Righteousness.

11. Aeshma, Khishm [Eshm], the incarnation of anger: he sows quarrel and
war. 'He is the chief source of evil for the creatures of Ohrmazd,
and the Kayanian heroes mostly perished through him'
(
Bund. 28.17
).
[Aeshma appears as Asmoday or Asmodeus in Christian and Jewish writings in the
apocryphal
Book of Tobit

3.8.
-JHP]

12. The fiend who corrupts and perverts men.

14. '"I drive away the Varenya daevas
, I drive away the
wind-daeva, from this house, from this borough, from this town,
from this land; from the very body of the man defiled by the dead,
from the very body of the woman defiled by the dead; from the
master of the house, from the lord of the borough, from the lord
of the town, from the lord of the land; from the whole of the
world of Righteousness."

13. The fiendish inhabitants of Varena (Gilan). Varena, like the
neighhouring Mazana (Mazandaran), was peopled with savage, non-Aryan
natives, who were considered men-demons. See
Vd1.18 and
.

15. 'These are the words in the Gathas that are to be said twice;
these are the words in the Gathas that are to be said thrice;
these are the words in the Gathas that are to be said four times.

16. 'These are the words that smite down Angra Mainyu; these are
the words that smite down Aeshma, the fiend of the murderous spear;
these are the words that smite down the daevas of Mazana
; these
are the words that smite down all the daevas.

14. The demoniac races of Mazandaran; Mazandaran was known in popular
tradition as a land of fiends and sorcerers.

17. 'These are the words that stand, against that Druj, against
that Nasu, who from the dead rushes upon the living, who from
the dead defiles the living.

18. 'Therefore, O Zarathushtra! thou shalt dig nine holes
in
the part of the ground where there is least water and where there
are fewest trees; where there is nothing that may be food either
for man or beast; "for purity is for man, next to life, the,
greatest good, that purity, O Zarathushtra, that is in the Religion
of Mazda for him who cleanses his own self with good thoughts,
words, and deeds
."

15. The nine holes for the Barashnom; see
above,
Vd9.6 seq.

16. See
Vd5.21
.

19. 'Make thy own self pure, O righteous man! any one in the world
here below can win purity for his own self, namely, when he cleanses
his own self with good thoughts, words, and deeds.

20. '"Yatha ahu vairyo: - The will of the Lord is the law
of righteousness," &c.

'"Kem-na mazda: - What protector hast thou given unto me,
O Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me?" &c.

'"Ke verethrem-ja: - Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching?" &c.

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! ... Perish away to the regions of the north,
never more to give unto death the living world of Righteousness!"'

17. The rest as in
Vd8.19-20
.

vd10sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 11
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd11sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd11sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 11. Special formulas for cleansing several objects.

This digital edition copyright prepared by Joseph H. Peterson; updated Jul 1, 2001.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

This chapter, like the preceding, is composed of spells intended
to drive away the Nasu. But they are of a more special character,
as they refer to the particular objects to he cleansed, such as
the house, the fire1 the water, the earth, the animals, the plants,
the man defiled with the dead. Each incantation consists of two
parts, a line from
the Gathas
which alludes, or rather is made
to allude, to the particular object (§§ 4, 5, 6, 7), and a general
exorcism, in the usual dialect (§§ 8-20), which is the same
for all the objects.

FARGARD 11. Special formulas for cleansing several objects

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda! most beneficent
spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall
I cleanse the house? how the fire? how the water? how the earth?
how the cow? how the tree? how the faithful man and the faithful
woman : how the stars? how the moon? how the sun? how the boundless
light? how all good things, made by Mazda, the offspring of the
holy principle?'

Notes:

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thou shalt chant the cleansing words,
and the house shall be clean; clean shall be the fire, clean the
water, clean the earth, clean the cow, clean the tree, clean the
faithful man and the faithful woman, clean the stars, clean the
moon, clean the sun, clean the boundless light, clean all good
things, made by Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle.

3. ['So thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words];
thou shalt chant the Ahuna-Vairya five times: "The will of
the Lord is the law of righteousness," &c.

'The Ahuna-Vairya preserves the person of man:

'"
Yatha ahu vairyo
: - The will of the Lord is the law of
righteousness," &c.

'"
Kem-na mazda
: - What protector hast thou given unto me,
O Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me?" &c.

'"Ke verethrem-ja: - Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching?" &c.

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta!"
&c.1

1. As in
Vd8.19, 20
.

4. 'If thou wantest to cleanse the house, say these words aloud:
"As long as the sickness lasts my great protector [is he
who teaches virtue to the perverse]
."

'If thou wantest to cleanse the fire, say these words aloud: "Thy
fire, first of all, do we approach with worship, O Ahura Mazda
!"

2.
Yasna 49.1
. The allusion is not
quite clear. This line was
recited by the Genius of the sky at the moment when Ahriman was
invading the sky (
Gr. Bd.
) Perhaps the small house of man is
compared here with that large house, the world.

3.
Yasna 36.1
.

5. 'If thou wantest to cleanse the water, say these words aloud:
" Waters we worship, the Maekainti waters, the Hebvainti
waters, the Fravazah waters.
"

'If thou wantest to cleanse the earth, say these words aloud:
"This earth we worship, this earth with the women, this earth
which bears us and those women who are thine, O Ahura
!"

4.
Yasna 38.3
.

5.
Yasna 38.1
.
'Who are thine,' that is, 'who are thy wives?

6. 'If thou wantest to cleanse the cow, say these words aloud:
"The best of all works we will fulfil while we order both
the learned and the unlearned, both masters and servants to secure
for the cattle a good resting-place and fodder
."

'If thou wantest to cleanse the trees, say these words aloud:
"For him
, as a reward, Mazda made the plants
grow up
."

6.
Yasna 35.4
.
'Let those excellent deeds be done for the behoof
of cattle, that is to say, let stables be made, and water and
fodder he given' (Comm.)

7. 'For him,' that is to say, to feed him; also 'out of him;'
for it was from the body of the first-horn bull that, after his
death, grew up all kinds of plants (
Bund. 4
).

8.
Yasna 48.6
.
See
Vd17.5
.

7. 'If thou wantest to cleanse the faithful man or the faithful
woman, say these words aloud: "May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman
come hither, for the men and women of Zarathushtra to rejoice,
for Vohu-mano to rejoice; with the desirable reward that Religion
deserves. I solicit for holiness that boon that is vouchsafed
by Ahura
!"

9.
Yasna 54.1
.
See
Vd20.11
. There is no special spell for
the cleansing of the sun, the moon, the stars, and the boundless
light (see §§ 1, 2), because they are not defiled by
the unclean one, they are only pained by seeing him
(
Vd9.41
); as soon as he is clean,
they are freed from the pain.

8. 'Then thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words.
Thou shalt chant the Ahuna-Vairya eight times:-

'"Yatha ahu vairya:- The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness,"
&c.

'"Kem-na mazda:- Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O Mazda?"
&c.

'"Ke verethrem-ga:- What protector hast thou given unto me?"
&c.

'"Who is the victorious?" &c.

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda!" &c.

10. As in
Vd8.19, 20.

9. 'I drive away Aeshma
, I drive away the Nasu, I drive away
direct defilement, I drive away indirect defilement.

['I drive away Khru, I drive away Khruighni
.

'I drive away Buidhi, I drive away the offspring of Buidhi
.

'I drive away Kundi, I drive away tle offspring of Kundi
.]

'I drive away the gaunt Bushyasta, I drive away the long-handed
Bushyasta
; [I drive away Muidhi
,
I drive away Kapasti
.]

'I drive away the Pairika
that comes upon the fire, upon the
water, upon the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree. I drive away
the uncleanness that comes upon the fire, upon the water, upon
the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree.

11. See
Vd10.13
.

12. Khrû and Khrûighni are not met with elsewhere; their names mean,
apparently, 'wound' and 'the wounding one.' They may
have been mere names or epithets of Aeshma khruidru, 'Aeshma of
the murderous spear.'

13. Bûidhi may be another pronunciation of Bûiti
(see
Vd19.1
).

14. Kuñdi is very likely the same as Kuñda
(
Vd19.41
) who is the
riding-stock of the sorcerers (
Bd. 28.42
).

15. See
Vd18.16
.

16. A demon unknown. Perhaps Intoxication.

17. Unknown. Perhaps Colocynth, the type of the bitter plants.

18. A female demon, the modern Parî [fairy -JHP], often associated with Yatu,
'the wizard.'

10. 'I drive thee away, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the fire,
from the water, from the earth, from the cow, from the tree, from
the faithful man and from the faithful woman, from the stars,
from the moon, from the sun, from the boundless light, from all
good things, made by Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle.

11. 'Then thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words;
thou shalt chant four
Ahuna-Vairyas
:-

'"Yatha aha vairyo:- The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness,"
&c.

'"
Kem-na mazda
:- What protector
hast thou given unto me?" &c.

'"Ke verethrem-ja:- Who is the victorious?" &c.

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda!" &c.

19. As in
Vd8.19, 20
.

12. 'Aeshma is driven away; away the Nasu; away direct defilement,
away indirect defilement.

['Khru is driven away, away Khruighni; away Buidhi, away the offspring
of Buidhi; away Kundi, away the offspring of Kundi.]

'The gaunt Bushyasta is driven away; away Bushyasta, the long-handed;
[away Muidhi, away Kapasti.]

'The Pairika is driven away that comes upon the fire, upon the
water, upon the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree. The uncleanness
is driven away that comes upon the fire, upon the water, upon
the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree.

13.
'Thou art driven away, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the
fire, from the water, from the earth, from the cow, from the tree,
from the faithful man and from the faithful woman, from the stars,
from the moon, from the sun, from the boundless light, from all
good things, made by Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle.

14. 'Then thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words;
thou shalt chant "Mazda ad moi" four times: "O
Mazda! say unto me the excellent words and the excellent works,
that through the good thought and the holiness of him who offers
thee the due meed of praise, thou mayest, O Lord! make the world
of Resurrection appear, at thy will, under thy sovereign rule
."

20.
Yasna 34.15.

15. 'I drive away Aeshma, I drive away the Nasu,' &c.

21. The rest as in § 9.

16. 'I drive thee away, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the fire,
from the water,' &c.

22. The rest as in § 10.

17. 'Then thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words;
thou shalt chant the Airyama Ishyo four times: "May the vow-fulfilling
Airyaman come hither!"'&c.

23. As in § 7.

18. 'Aeshma is driven away; away the Nasu,' &c.

24. As in § 12.

19. 'Thou art driven away, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the
fire, from the water,' &c.

25. As in § 13.

20. 'Then thou shalt say these victorious, most healing words;
thou shalt chant five Ahuna-Vairyas:-

'"Yatha ahu vairyo:- The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness,"
&c.

'"Kem-na mazda:- Whom hast thou placed to protect me?"
&c.

'"Ke verethrem-ja:- Who is he who will smite the fiend?"
&c.

'"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world
of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj! Rush away, O Druj! Perish away,
O Druj! Perish away to the regions of the north, never more to
give unto death the living world of Righteousness!"'

26. See
Vd8.19, 20
.

vd11sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 12
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd12sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd12sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 12. The Upaman.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 1, 2001.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

This chapter is found only in the
Vendidad Sada
; it is missing
in the Zand-Pahlavi
Vendidad
. This is owing, as it seems, only
to the accidental loss of some folios in the one manuscript from
which all the copies as yet known have been derived; and, in fact,
even in the most ancient manuscripts the following Fargard is
numbered the thirteenth (Westergaard,
Zend-Avesta
, preface, p. 5).

The directions in the
preceding chapter
are general, and do not
depend on the relationship of the faithful with the deceased person;
whereas those in this Fargard are of a special character, and
apply only to the near relatives of the dead. Their object is
to determine how long the time of 'staying' (upaman) should
last for different relatives. What is meant by this word is not
explained; but, as the word upaman is usually employed to indicate
the staying of the unclean in the Armesht-gah, apart from the faithful
and from every clean object, that word
upaman
seems to show a
certain period of mourning, marked by abstention from usual
avocations.

The length of the upaman varies with the degrees of relationship;.
and at every degree it is double for relations who have died in
a state of sin (that is, with a sin not redeemed by the Patet:
see
Vd9.49 note 30
). The relative length of the upaman is as follows:--

For the head of a family (§ 7):
6 months (or a year).

First degree.

(For father or mother (§1))

For son or daughter (§ 3)

For brother or sister (§ 5):

30 days (or 60).

Second degree.

For grandfather or grandmother (§ 9)

For grandson or granddaughter (§ 11):

25 days (or 50).

Third degree.

For uncle or aunt (§ 13):

20 days (or 40).

Fourth degree.

For male cousin or female cousin (§ 15):

15 days (or 30).

Fifth degree.

For the son or daughter of a cousin (§ 17):

10 days (or 20).

Sixth degree.

For the grandson or the granddaughter of a cousin (§ 19):

5 days (or 10).

FARGARD 12. The Upaman, how long it lasts for different relatives

1. If one's father or mother dies, how long shall they stay [in
mourning], the son for his father, the daughter for her mother?
How long for the righeous? How long for the sinners
?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay thirty days for the
righteous, sixty days for the sinners.'

Notes:

1. How long if the dead person died in a state of holiness (a dahma)?
How long if in the state of a Peshotanu [mortal sin -JHP]?

2. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters
; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter
, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

2. This refers probably to the sacrifice that is offered on each
of the three days that follow the death of a Zoroastrian for the
salvation of his soul.

3. All the other objects over which the Amesha-Spentas preside (such
as the cow, the metals, &c.)

3. If one's son or daughter dies, how long shall they stay, the
father for his son, the mother for her daughter? How long for
the righteous? How long for the sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay thirty days for the
righteous, sixty days for the sinners.'

4. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

5. If one's brother or sister dies, how long shall they stay,
the brother for his brother, the sister for her sister? How long
for the righteous? How long for the sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay thirty days for the
righteous, sixty days for the sinners.'

6. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again? Ahura Mazda
answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three times, you shall wash
your clothes three times, you shall chant the Gathas three times;
you shall offer up a sacrifice to my Fire, you shall bind up the
bundles of Baresma, you shall bring libations to the good waters;
then the house shall be clean, and then the waters may enter,
then the fire may enter, and then the Amesha-Spentas may enter, O
Spitama Zarathushtra!'

7. If the master of the house
dies, or if the mistress of the
house dies, how long shall they stay? How long for the righteous?
How long for the sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They
shall stay six months for the
righteous, a year for the sinners.'

4. The chief of the family, the paterfamilias. The Zoroastrian
family is organised on the patriarchal system.

5. All the familia, both relatives and servants.

8. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'you shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

9. If one's grandfather or grandmother dies, how long shall
they stay, the grandson for his grandfather, the granddaughter
for her grandmother? How long for the righteous? How long for
the sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay twenty-five days for
the righteous, fifty days for the sinners.'

10. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

11. If one's grandson or granddaughter dies, how long shall they
stay, the grandfather for his grandson, the grandmother for her
granddaughter? How long for the righteous? How long for the
sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay twenty-five days for
the righteous, fifty days for the sinners.'

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

13. If one's uncle or aunt dies, how long shall they stay, the
nephew for his uncle, the niece for her aunt? How long for the
righteous? How long for the sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay twenty days for the
righteous, forty days for the sinners.'

14. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

15. If one's male cousin or female cousin dies, how long shall
they stay? How long for the righteous? How long for the
sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay fifteen days for the
righteous, thirty days for the sinners.'

16. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

17. If the son or the daughter of a cousin dies, how long shall
they stay? How long for the righteous: How long for the
sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay ten days for the
righteous, twenty days for the sinners.'

18. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may enter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

19. If the grandson of a cousin or the granddaughter of a cousin
dies, how long shall they stay? How long for the righteous? How
long for the sinners?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall stay five days for the
righteous, ten days for the sinners.'

20. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
cleanse the house? How shall it be clean again?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'You shall wash your bodies three
times, you shall wash your clothes three times, you shall chant
the Gathas three times; you shall offer up a sacrifice to my
Fire, you shall bind up the bundles of Baresma, you shall bring
libations to the good waters; then the house shall be clean, and
then the waters may enter, then the fire may euter, and then the
Amesha-Spentas may enter, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

21. If a man dies, of whatever race he is, who does not belong
to the true faith, or the true law
, what part of the creation of
the good spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] does he directly defile? What part does he
indirectly defile?

6. An infidel, whether he is a relation or not.

6. Ahura Mazda answered: 'No more than a frog does whose venom
is dried up, and that has been dead more than a year. Whilst
alive, indeed, O Spitama Zarathushtra! such wicked, two-legged
ruffian as an ungodly Ashemaogha, directly defiles the creatures
of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP], and indirectly defiles them.

7. §§ 22-24 =
Vd5.36-38, text and notes.

23. 'Whilst alive he smites the water; whilst alive he blows out
the fire; whilst alive he carries off the cow; whilst alive he
smites the faithful man with a deadly blow, that parts the soul
from the body; not so will he do when dead.

24. 'Whilst alive, indeed, O Spitama Zarathushtra! such wicked,
two-legged ruffian as an ungodly Ashemaogha, robs the faithful
man of the full possession of his food, of his clothing, of his
wood, of his bed, of his vessels; not so will he do when dead.'

vd12sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 13
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd13sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd13sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 13. The dog.

This digital edition pepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Mar 27, 2011.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

I (1-7). The dog of Ohrmazd and the dog of Ahriman.

(a. 1-4). Holiness of the dog Vanghapara ('the hedgehog').

(b. 5-7). Hatefulness of the dog Zairimyangura ('the tortoise').

II (8-16). The several kinds of dogs. Penalties for the murder
of a dog.

III (17-19) On the duties of the shepherd's dog and the house-dog.

IV (20-38). On the food due to the dog.

V (29-38). On the mad dog and the dog diseased; how they are to
be kept, and cured.

VI (39-40). On the excellence of the dog.

VII (41-43). On the wolf-dog.

VIII (44-48). On the virtues and vices of the dog.

IX (49-50). Praise of the dog.

X (51-54). The water-dog.

This Fargard is the only complete fragment, still in existence,
of a large canine literature: a whole section of the
Ganba-sar-nijat
Nask
[Duwasrud Nask] was dedicated to the dog (the so-called

Fargard Pasush-haurvastan;
West,
Denkard
(Pahlavi Texts, IV), VIII, 23; 24, 5;
33, &c.
)

FARGARD 13. The dog.

Ia.

Notes:

1. Which is the good creature among the creatures of the Good
Spirit that from midnight till the sun is up goes and kills
thousands of the creatures of the Evil Spirit?

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The dog with the prickly back, with
the long and thin muzzle, the dog Vanghapara
, which
evil-speaking people call the Duzaka
; this is the good creature
among the creatures of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] that from midnight till
the sun is up goes and kills thousands of the creatures of the
Evil Spirit.

1. The hedgehog. 'The hedgehog, according to the

Bund. 19.28
,
is created in opposition to the ant that carries off grain,
as it says that the hedgehog, every time that it voids urine into
an ant's nest, will destroy a thousand ants, (Bund. 19.28;
cf.
Saddar 57
).
When the Arabs conquered Saistan, the inhabitants
submitted on the condition that hedgehogs should not be killed
nor hunted for, as they got rid of the vipers which swarm in that
country. Every house had its hedgehog (Yaqout,
Dictionnaire de
la Perse
, p. 303). Plutarch counts the hedgehog amongst the animals
sacred to the Magi (
Quaestiones Conviviales
, IV, 5, 2)

2. Dusaka is the popular name of the hedgehog (Pers. zuza). It is
not without importance which name is given to a being:
'When called by its high name, it is powerful' (Comm.); cf. §
6, and
Vd18.15
.

3. 'And whosoever, O Zarathushtra! shall kill the dog with the
prickly back, with the long and thin muzzle, the dog Vanghapara,
which evil-speaking people call the Duzaka, kills his own soul
for nine generations, nor shall he find a way over the Chinwad
bridge
, unless he has, while alive, atoned for his sin
.'

3. The bridge leading to Paradise; see
Vd19.30
.

4. Cf. § 54. Framji translates: 'He cannot atone for it in his life
even by performing a sacrifice to Sraosha' (cf.
Vd9.56,
text and note
).

4. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man kill
the dog with the prickly back, with the long and thin muzzle, the
dog Vanghapara, which evil-speaking people call the Duzaka, what
is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, a thousand stripes with the Sraosho-charana.

Ib.

5. Which is the evil creature among the creatures of the Evil
Spirit that from midnight till the sun is up goes and kills
thousands of the creatures of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP]?

6. Ahura Mazda answered: 'The daeva Zairimyangura
, which
evil-speaking people call the Zairimyaka
, this is the evil
creature among the creatures of the Evil Spirit that from
midnight till the sun is up goes and kills thousands of the
creatures of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP].

5. The tortoise (Framji and
Rivayats

).

6. 'When not so called it is less strong' (Comm.) Zairimyâka
is a lucky name, and means, as it seems, who lives in verdure;
Zairimyangura seems to mean 'the verdure-devourer.'

7. 'And whosoever, O Zarathushtra! shall kill the daeva
Zairimyangura, which evil-speaking people call the Zairimyaka,
his sins in thought, word, and deed are redeemed as they would be
by a Patet; his sins in thought, word, and deed are atoned for
.

7. See
Vd14.5

II.

8. 'Whosoever shall smite either a shepherd's dog, or a
house-dog, or a Vohunazga dog
, or a trained dog
,
his soul when passing to the other world, shall fly

howling louder and more sorely grieved than the sheep does in the
lofty forest where the wolf ranges.

8. See § 19, note.

9. A hunting-dog.

10. 'From Paradise' (Comm.)

9. 'No soul will come and meet his departing soul and help it,
howling and grieved in the other world; nor will the dogs that
keep the [Chinwad] bridge
help his departing soul howling and
grieved in the other world.

11. See
Vd19.30
.

10. 'If a man shall smite a shepherd's dog so that it becomes
unfit for work, if he shall cut off its ear or its paw, and
thereupon a thief or a wolf break in and carry away [sheep] from
the fold, without the dog giving any warning, the man shall pay
for the loss, and he shall pay for the wound of the dog as for
wilful wounding
.

12. Baodhô-varshta; see
Vd7.38 n.

11. 'If a man shall smite a house-dog so that it becomes unfit
for work, if he shall cut off its ear or its paw, and thereupon a
thief or a wolf break in and carry away [anything] from the
house, without the dog giving any warning, the man shall pay for
the loss, and he shall pay for the wound of the dog as for wilful
wounding.'

12. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall smite a shepherd's dog, so that it gives up the ghost and
the soul parts from the body, what is the penalty that he shall
pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Eight hundred stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, eight hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

13. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall smite a house-dog so that it gives up the ghost and the
soul parts from the body, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered; 'Seven hundred stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, seven hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

14. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall smite a Vohunazga dog so that it gives up the ghost and
the soul parts from the body, what is the penalty that he shall
pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Six hundred stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, six hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

15. O Maker of tlie material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall smite a Tauruna dog
so that it gives up the ghost and the
soul parts from the body, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Five hundred stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, five hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

13. Tauruna seems to be another name of the trained or hunting-dog
(cf. § 8 compared with §§ 12-15), though tradition translates it
'a dog not older than four months.'

16. 'This is the penalty for the murder of a
Jazhu dog, of a Vizu dog
, of a porcupine dog
,
of a sharptoothed weasel
, of a swift-running fox; this
is the penalty for the murder of any of the creatures
of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu] belonging to the dog kind,
except the water-dog
.'

14. Unknown. See
Vd5.31, 32
.

15. A porcupine.
See Vd5.31
.

16. A weasel. See
Vd5.33
.

17. The otter. 'For the penalty in that case is most heavy' (Comm.)
See § 52 seq. and
Vd14
.

III.

17. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the
place of the shepherd's dog?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He comes and goes a Yujyesti
round
about the fold, watching for the thief and the wolf.'

18. A distance of sixteen Hathras (16,000 paces).

18. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the
place of the house-dog?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He comes and goes a Hathra round
about the house, watching for the thief and the wolf.'

19. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the
place of the Vohunazga dog?.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He claims none of those talents, and
only seeks for his subsistence
.'

19. 'He cannot do the same as the shepherd's dog and the house dog
do, but he catches Khrafstras and smites the Nasu' (Comm.) It
is 'the dog without a master' (gharîb), the vagrant dog; he is
held in great esteem (§ 22), and is one or the dogs which can
be used for the Sag-did.

IV.

20. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man give
bad food to a shepherd's dog, of what sin does he make himself
guilty?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He makes himself guilty of the same
guilt as though he should serve bad food to a master of a house
of the first rank.'

21. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man give
bad food to a house-dog, of what sin does he make himself guilty?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He makes himself guilty of the same
guilt as though he should serve bad food to a master of a house
of middle rank.'

22. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man give
bad food to a Vohunazga dog, of what sin does he make himself
guilty?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He makes himself guilty of the same
guilt as though he should serve bad food to a holy man, who
should come to his house in the character of a priest
.'

20. The Vohunazga dog has no domicile, therefore he is not compared
with the master of a house, but with a wandering friar, who lives
on charity.

23. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man give
bad food to a Tauruna dog, of what sin does he make himself
guilty?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He makes himself guilty of the same
guilt as though he should serve bad food to a young man, born of
pious parents, and who can already answer for his deeds
.'

21. Probably, 'Who has performed the nu-zud [navjote -JHP], fifteen years old.'
The young dog enters the community of the faithful at the age
of four months, when he is fit for the Sag-did and can expel the
Nasu.

24. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall give bad food to a shepherd's dog, what is the penalty that
he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the
Sraosho-charana
.'

22. 'I also saw the soul of a man, whom demons, just like dogs,
ever tear. That man gives bread to the dogs, and they eat it not;
but they ever devour the breast, legs, belly, and thighs of the
man. And I asked thus: What sin was committed by this body, whose
soul suffers so severe a punishment? Srosh the pious and Atar
the angel said thus: This is the soul of that wicked man who,
in the world, kept back the food of the dogs of shepherds and house-holders;
or beat and killed them' (
Arda Viraf

, translated by Haug).

25. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall give bad food to a house-dog, what is the penalty that he
shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ninety stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
ninety stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

26. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall give bad food to a Vohunazga dog, what is the penalty that
he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seventy stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, seventy stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

27. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall give bad food to a Tauruna dog, what is the penalty that he
shall pay?

Ahura Mazda ansvvered: 'Fifty stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
fifty stripes with the Sraosho-charana.

28. 'For in this material world, O Spitama Zarathushtra! it is
the dog, of all the creatures of the Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu], that most
quickly decays into age, while not eating near eating people, and
watching goods none of which it receives. Bring ye unto him milk
and fat with meat
; this is the right food for the dog
.'

23. The same food as recommended for the dog by Columella (
Ordacea
farina cum sero
, VII, 12; cf. Virgil,
Pasce sero pingui
, Georg.
III, 406).

24. 'Whenever one eats bread one must put aside three mouthfuls and
give them to the dog ... for among all the poor there is none
poorer than the dog' (
Saddar 31
).

V.

29. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If there be
in the house of a worshipper of Mazda a mad dog that bites
without barking, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

30. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall put a wooden collar around
his neck, and they shall tie thereto a muzzle, an asti
thick if
the wood be hard, two astis thick if it be soft. To that collar
they shall tie it; by the two sides
of the collar they shall tie
it.

25. A measure of unknown amount. Framji reads
ishti
, 'a brick' thick.

26. By the left and the right side of it.

31. 'If they shall not do so, and the mad dog that bites without
barking, smite a sheep or wound a man, the dog shall pay for the
wound of the wounded as for wilful murder
.

27. According to Solon's law, the dog who had bitten a man was to
be delivered to him tied up to a block four cubits long (Plutarchus,

Solon
24). The Book of
Deuteronomy
orders the ox who has killed
a man to be put to death.

32. 'If the dog shall smite a sheep or wound a man, they shall
cut off his right ear.

'If he shall smite another sheep or wound another man, they
shall cut off his left ear.

33. 'If he shall smite a third sheep or wound a third man, they
shall make a cut in his right foot
. If he shall smite a fourth
sheep or wound a fourth man, they shall make a cut in his left
foot.

28. 'They only cut off a piece of flesh from the foot' (Brouillons
d'Anquetil).

34. 'If he shall for the fifth time smite a sheep or wound a
man, they shall cut off his tail.

'Therefore they shall tie a muzzle to the collar; by the two
sides of the collar they shall tie it. If they shall not do so,
and the mad dog that bites without barking, smite a sheep or
wound a man, he shall pay for the wound of the wounded as for
wilful murder.'

35. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If there be
in the house of a worshipper of Mazda a mad dog, who has no
scent, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall attend him to heal him, in
the same manner as they would do for one of the faithful.'

36. O Maker oi the material world, thou Holy One! If they try
to heal him and fail, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

37. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall put a wooden collar around
his neck, and they shall tie thereto a muzzle, an asti thick if
the wood be hard, two astis thick if it be soft. To that collar
they shall tie it; by the two sides of the collar they shall tie
it.

38. 'If they shall not do so, the scentless dog may fall into a
hole, or a well, or a precipice, or a river, or a canal, and come
to grief: if he come to grief so, they shall be therefore
Peshotanus.

VI.

39. 'The dog, O Spitama Zarathushtra! I, Ahura Mazda, have made
self-clothed and self-shod; watchful and wakeful; and
sharp-toothed; born to take his food from man and to watch over
man's goods. I, Ahura Mazda, have made the dog strong of body
against the evil-doer, when sound of mind and watchful over your
goods.

40. 'And whosoever shall awake at his voice, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! neither shall the thief nor the wolf carry anything
from his house, without his being warned; the wolf shall be
smitten and torn to pieces; he is driven away, he melts away like
snow
.'

29. Doubtful.

VII.

41. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which of the
two wolves deserves more to be killed, the one that a he-dog
begets of a she-wolf, or the one that a he-wolf begets of a
she-dog?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Of these two wolves, the one that a
he-dog begets of a she-wolf deserves more to be killed than the
one that a he-wolf begets of a she-dog.

42. 'For the dogs born therefrom fall on the shepherd's dog, on
the house-dog, on the Vohu-nazga dog, on the trained dog, and
destroy the folds; such dogs are more murderous, more
mischievous, more destructive to the folds than any other dogs
.

30. 'Ultroque gravis succedere tigrim

Aura canis, majore tulit de sanguine foetum.

Sed praeceps virtus ipsa venabitur aula:

Ille tibi et pecudum multo cum sanguine crescet.'
- Gratius Faliscus,
Cyneg.
165 seq.

43. 'And the wolves born therefrom fall on the shepherd's dog,
on the house-dog, on the Vohunazga dog, on the trained dog, and
destroy the folds; such wolves are more murderous, more
mischievous, more destructive to the folds than any other wolves.

VIII.

44. 'A dog has the characters of eight sorts of people:-

'He has the character of a priest,

'He has the character of a warrior,

'He has the character of a husbandman,

'He has the character of a strolling singer,

'He has the character of a thief,

'He has the character of a disu,

'He has the character of a courtezan,

'He has the character of a child.

45. 'He eats the refuse, like a priest
; he is easily
satisfied
, like a priest; he is patient, like a priest; he wants
only a small piece of bread, like a priest; in these things he is
like unto a priest.

'He marches in front, like a warrior; he fights for the
beneficent cow, like a warrior
; he goes first out of the house,
like a warrior
; in these things he is like unto a warrior.

31. A wandering priest (see above,
note 20
).

32. 'Good treatment makes him joyous' (Comm.)

33. 'He keeps away the wolf and the thief' (Comm.)

34. This clause is, as it seems, repeated here by mistake from § 46.

46. 'He is watchful and sleeps lightly, like a husbandman; he
goes first out of the house, like a husbandman
; he returns last
into the house, like a husbandman
; in these things he is like
unto a husbandman.

'He is fond of singing, like a strolling singer
; he wounds
him who gets too near
, like a strolling singer; he is
ill-trained, like a strolling singer; he is changeful, like a
strolling singer; in these things he is like unto a strolling
singer.

35. When taking the cattle out of the stables.

36. When bringing the cattle back to the stables.

37. The so-called Looris of nowadays.

38. He insults or robs the passer by, like a Loori.-' The Looris
wander in the world, seeking their life, bed-fellows and fellow-travelers
of the dogs and the wolves, ever on the roads to rob day and night'
(Firdausi).

47. 'He is fond of darkness, like a thief; he prowls about in
darkness, like a thief; he is a shameless eater, like a thief; he
is therefore an unfaithful keeper, like a thief
; in these things
he is like unto a thief.

'He is fond of darkness, like a disu
; he prowls about in
darkness, like a disu; he is a shameless eater, like a disu; he
is therefore an unfaithful keeper, like a disu; in these things
he is like unto a disu.

39. 'When one trusts him with something, he eats it up' (Comm.)

40. According to Framji, 'a wild beast.'

48. 'He is fond of singing, like a courtezan; he wounds him who
gets too near, like a courtezan; he roams along the roads, like a
courtezan; he is ill-trained, like a courtezan; he is changeful,
like a courtezan
; in these things he is like unto a courtezan.

'He is fond of sleep, like a child; he is tender like snow
,
like a child; he is full of tongue, like a child; he digs the
earth with his paws
, like a child; in these things he is like
unto a child.

41. The description of the courtesan follows closely that of the
singer: in the East a public songstress is generally a prostitute.
Loori means both a singer and a prostitute.

42. Doubtful.

IX.

49. 'If those two dogs of mine, the shepherd's dog and the
house-dog, pass by any of my houses, let them never be kept away
from it.

'For no house could subsist on the earth made by Ahura, but
for those two dogs of mine, the shepherd's dog and the
house-dog
.'

43. 'But for the dog not a single head of cattle would remain in
existence' (
Saddar
).

X.

50. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When a dog
dies, with marrow and seed
dried up, whereto does his ghost go?

44. Marrow is the seat of life, the spine is 'the column and the
spring of life' (
Yt10.71
);
the sperm comes from it
(
Bundahishn
).
The same theory prevailed in India, where the sperm is called
majjâ-samudbhava, 'what is born from marrow;' it was
followed by Plato (
Timaeus
74, 91; cf. Censorinus,
De die natali
,
5), and disproved by Aristotle (
De Part. Anim.
III, 7).

51. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It passes to the spring of the
waters
, O Spitama Zarathushtra! and there out of them two
water-dogs are formed: out of every thousand dogs and every
thousand she-dogs, a couple is formed, a water-dog and a water
she-dog
.

45. To the spring of Ardvi Sura, the goddess of waters.

46. There is therefore in a single water-dog as much life and holiness
as in a thousand dogs. This accounts for the following. -- The water-dog
(udra upâpa; Persian sag-îâbî) is the otter.

52. 'He who kills a water-dog brings about a drought that dries
up pastures.

'Until then, O Spitama Zarathushtra! sweetness and fatness
would flow out from that land and from those fields, with health
and healing, with fulness and increase and growth, and a growing
of corn and grass.'

53. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When are
sweetness and fatness to come back again to that land and to
those fields, with health and healing, with fulness and increase
and growth, and a growing of corn and grass?

54, 55. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Sweetness and fatness will never
come back again to that land and to those fields, with health and
healing, with fulness and increase and growth, and a growing of
corn and grass, until the murderer of the water-dog has been
smitten to death on the spot, and the holy soul of the dog has
been offered up a sacrifice, for three days and three nights,
with fire blazing, with Baresma tied up, and with Haoma
prepared
.

47. See
Vd9.55, 56, note 34.

56. ['Then sweetness and fatness will come back again to that
land and to those fields, with health and healing, with fulness
and increase and growth, and a growing of corn and grass
.']

48. See
Vd9.53-57
.

vd13sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 14
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd14sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd14sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 14. Atoning for the murder of a water-dog.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

This Fargard is nothing more than an appendix to the last clauses
in the
preceding Fargard (§ 50 seq.)

How the murder of a water-dog (an otter) may be atoned for is
described in it at full length.
The extravagance of the penalties prescribed may well make it
doubtful whether the legislation of the
Vendidad
had ever any
substantial existence in practice. These exorbitant prescriptions
seem to be intended only to impress on the mind of the faithful
the heinousness of the offense to be avoided.

FARGARD 14. Atoning for the murder of a water-dog

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda, most
beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!
He who smites one of those water-dogs that are born one from a
thousand dogs and a thousand she-dogs
, so that he gives up the
ghost and the soul parts from the body, what is the penalty that
he shall pay?'

Notes:

1. See
preceding Fargard § 51
.

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He shall pay ten thousand stripes
with the Aspahe-astra, ten thousand stripes with the
Sraosho-charana
.

'He shall godly and piously bring unto the fire of Ahura
Mazda
ten thousand loads of hard, well dried, well examined

wood, to redeem his own soul.

2. He shall pay 50 tanapuhrs (= 15,000 istirs = 60,000 dirhems).
If he can afford it, he will alone in the manner stated in the

Avesta
; if he cannot afford it, it will be sufficient to perform
a complete Izashne [Yasna -JHP] (sacrifice),' (Comm.)

3. To the altar of the Warharan fire.

4. It is forbidden to take any ill-smelling thing to the fire and
to kindle it thereon; it is forbidden to kindle green wood, and
even though the wood were hard and dry, one must examine it three
times, lest there may be any hair or any unclean matter upon it,
(
Gr. Riv.
) Although the pious Arda Viraf had always taken the utmost
care never to put on the fire any wood but such as was seven years
old, yet, when he entered Paradise, Atar, the genius of fire,
showed him reproachfully a large tank full of the water which
that wood had exuded (see
Arda Viraf
).

3. 'He shall godly and piously, bring unto the fire of Ahura
Mazda ten thousand loads of soft wood, of Urvasna, Vohu-gaona,
Vohu-kereti, Hadha-naepata
, or any sweet-scented plant, to
redeem his own soul.

5. See above,
Vd8.2, note 4
.

4. 'He shall godly and piously tie ten thousand bundles of
Baresma, to redeem his own soul.

'He shall offer up to the Good Waters ten thousand Zaothra
libations with the Haoma and the milk, cleanly prepared and well
strained, cleanly prepared and well strained by a pious man, and
mixed with the roots of the tree known as Hadha-naepata, to
redeem his own soul.

5. 'He shall kill ten thousand snakes of those that go upon the
belly. He shall kill ten thousand Kahrpus, who are snakes with
the shape of a dog
. He shall hill ten thousand tortoises
. He
shall kill ten thousand land-frogs
; he shall kill ten thousand
water-frogs. He shall kill ten thousand corn-carrying ants
; he
shall kill ten thousand ants of the small, venomous mischievous
kind
.

6. 'Mâr bânak snakes: they are dog-like, because they sit on
their hindparts' (Comm.) The cat (gurba = Kahrpu) seems to be the
animal intended. In a paraphrase of this passage in a Parsi Rivayat,
the cat is numbered amongst the Khrafstras which it is enjoined
to kill to redeem a sin (India Office Library, VIII, 13); cf.
G. du Chinozi, p. 462: 'Les animaux que les Gaures ont en horreur
sont les serpents, les couleuvres, les lezars, et autres de cette
espece, les crapaux, lea grenouilles, lea écrevisses, les rats
et souris, et sur tout le chat.'

7. See
Vd8.6-7
.

8. 'Those that can go out of water and live on the dry ground'
(Comm.) 'Pour les grenouilles et crapaux, ils disent que ce sont
ceux (eux?) qui sont cause de ce que les hommes meurent, gâtans
les eaus où ils habitent continuellement, et que d'autant plus
qu'il y en a dans le païs, d'autant plus lea caus causent-elles
des maladies et enfin la mort,' G. du Chinon, p.465.

9. Herodotus already mentions the war waged by the Magi against snakes
and ants (I, 140).-- 'Un jour que j'étois surpris de la guerre qu'ils
font aux fourmis, ils me dirent que ces animaux ne faisaient que
voler par des amas des grains plus qu'il n'étoit nécessaire pour
leur nourriture,' G. du Chinon, p.464. Firdausi protested against
the proscription: 'Do no harm to the corn-carrying ant; a living
thing it is, and its life is dear to it.' The celebrated high-priest
of the Parsis, the late Moola Firooz, entered those lines into
his
Pand Nâmah
, which may betoken better days for
the wise little creature.

10. Perhaps: 'of the small, venomous kind, with a mischievous track'
(
Bund. 19.28
: when the
grain-carrier travels over the earth, it produces a hollow track:
when the hedgehog travels over it, the track goes away from it
and it becomes level:' cf.
Vd13.2, note
).

6. 'He shall kill ten thousand worms of those that live on
dirt; he shall kill ten thousand raging flies
.

'He shall fill up ten thousand holes for the unclean
.

'He shall godly and piously give to godly men
twice the set
of seven implements for the fire
, to redeem his own soul,
namely:-

11. Corpse-flies; see
Vd7.2
.

12. 'The holes at which the unclean are washed' (Comm.;
see
Vd9.6 seq.
)

13. To priests.

14. For the sacred fire.

7. 'The two answering implements for fire
; a broom
; a pair of
tongs; a pair of round bellows extended at the bottom, contracted
at the top; a sharp-edged sharp-pointed
adze; a sharp-toothed
sharp-pointed saw; by means of which the worshippers of Mazda
procure wood for the fire of Ahura Mazda.

15. Two receptacles, one for the wood, another for the incense.

16. To cleanse the Atash-dân or fire-vessel
(
Yasna 9.1
).

17. Literally, 'sharp-kneed.'

8. 'He shall godly and piously give to godly men a set of the
priestly instruments of which the priests make use, to redeem his
own soul, namely: The Astra
; the meat-vessel; the Paitidana
;
the Khrafstraghna
; the Sraosho-charana
; the cup for the
Myazda
; the cups for mixing and dividing
;
the regular mortar
; the Haoma cups
; and the Baresma.

18. The Aspahê-ashtra.

19. As everything that goes out of man is unclean, his breath defiles
all that it touches; priests, therefore, while on duty, and even
laymen, while praying or eating, must wear a mouth-veil, the
Paitidâna (Parsi Penom), consisting 'of two pieces of white cotton
cloth, hanging loosely from the bridge of the nose to, at least,
two inches below the mouth, and tied with two strings at the back
of the head' (Haug,
Essays
, 2nd ed. P.243, n. 1; cf. Comm. ad

Vd18.1
, and Anquetil II, 530).

20. The 'Khrafstra-killer;' an instrument for killing snakes, &c.
It is a stick with a leather thong at its end, something like
the Indian fly-flap.

21. See General Introduction.

22. Doubtful.

23. The cup in which the juice of the hom and or the urvarâm
(the twigs of hadha-naepata which are pounded together with the
hom) is received from the mortar (Comm.)

24. The mortar with its pestle.

25. The cup on which twigs of Haoma are laid before being pounded,
the so-called tashtah (Anquetil II, 533); 'some say, the hom-strainer'
[a saucer with nine holes], Comm.

[See
descriptions of the
Alat
or
ritual implements
. -JHP]

9. 'He shall godly and piously give to godly
men a set of all the war implements of which the
warriors make use, to redeem his own soul;

'The first being a javelin, the second a sword, the
third a club, the fourth a bow, the fifth a saddle with
a quiver and thirty iron
-headed arrows, the sixth a
sling with arm-string and with thirty sling stones
;

'The seventh a cuirass, the eighth a hauberk
, the
ninth a tunic
, the tenth a helmet, the eleventh a
girdle, the twelfth a pair of greaves.

25b. Dar: brass. -JHP

26. These are six offensive arms: the next six are defensive arms. --
Cf. W. Jackson:
Herodotus
VII, 61, or
The Arms of the
Ancient Persians illustrated from Iranian Sources
; New York, 1894.

27. 'Going from the helm to the cuirass' (Comm.)

28. 'Under the cuirass' (Comm.)

10. 'He shall godly and piously give to godly men a set of all
the implements of which the husbandmen make use, to redeem his
own soul, namely: A plough with yoke and ...
; a goad for ox; a
mortar of stone; a round-headed hand-mill for grinding corn;

29. Yuyô-semi ayazhâna pairi-darezâna.

11. 'A spade for digging and tilling; one measure of silver and
one measure of gold.'

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How much
silver?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'The price of a stallion.'

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How much gold?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'The price of a he-camel.

12. 'He shall godly and piously procure a rill of running water

for godly husbandmen, to redeem his own soul.'

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How large is
the rill?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'The depth of a dog, and the breadth
of a dog
.

30. The most precious of all gifts in such a dry place as Iran.
Water is obtained either through canals of derivation or through
underground canals (kârêz, kanât).

31. Which is estimated 'a foot deep, a foot broad' (Comm.)

13. 'He shall godly and piously give a piece of arable land to
godly men, to redeem his own soul.'

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How large is
the piece of land?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'As much as can be watered with such a
rill divided into two canals
.

32. Doubtful.

14. 'He shall godly and piously procure for godly men a stable
for oxen, with nine hathras and nine nematas
, to
redeem his own soul.'

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How large is
the stable?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It shall have twelve alleys
in the
largest part of the house, nine alleys in the middle part, six
alleys in the smallest part.

'He shall godly and piously give to godly men goodly beds
with Sheets and cushions, to redeem his own soul.

33. Meaning unknown.

34. Twelve ranks of stalls (?).

15. 'He shall godly and piously give in marriage to a godly man
a virgin maid, whom no man has known
, to redeem his own soul.'

O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What sort of
maid?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'A sister or a daughter of his, at the
age of puberty, with ear-rings in her ears and past her fifteenth
year.

35. Match-making is a good work (
Vd4.44
).

16. 'He shall godly and piously give to holy men twice seven
head of small cattle, to redeem his own soul.'

'He shall bring up twice seven whelps.

'He shall throw twice seven bridges over canal.

17. 'He shall put into repair twice nine stables that are out
of repair.

'He shall cleanse twice nine dogs from stipti, anairiti, and
vyangura
, and all the diseases that are produced on the body of
a dog.

'He shall treat twice nine godly men to their fill of meat,
bread, strong drink, and wine.

36. Meaning unknown.

18. 'This is the penalty, this is the atonement which saves the
faithful man who submits to it not him who does not submit to it.
Such a one shall surely be an inhabitant in the mansion of the
Druj
.'

37. See
Vd8.107
.

vd14sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 15
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd15sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd15sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 15. Regarding certain sins and obligations.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 4, 2001.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

I (1-8). On five sins the commission of which makes the sinner
a Peshotanu.

II a (9-12). On unlawful unions and attempts to procure miscarriage.

II b (13-19). On the obligations of the illegitimate father towards
the mother and the child.

III (20-45). On the treatment of a bitch big with young.

IV (46-51). On the breeding of dogs.

FARGARD 15. Regarding certain sins and obligations

I.

Notes:

1. How many are the sins that men commit and that, being committed
and not confessed, nor atoned for, make their committer a Peshotanu
?

1. That is to say: he shall receive two hundred strokes with the
Aspahe-ashtra or the Sraosho-charana; or pay three hundred istirs.

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'There are five such sins, O holy Zarathushtra!
It is the first of these sins that men commit when a man teaches
one of the faithful another faith, another law
, a lower doctrine,
and he leads him astray with a full knowledge and conscience of
the sin: the man who has done the deed becomes a Peshotanu.

2. The Commentary has, 'that is, a creed that is not ours.'

3. 'It is the second of these sins when a man gives bones too
hard or food too hot to a shepherd's dog or to a house-dog;

4. 'If the bones stick in the dog's teeth or stop in his throat;
or if the food too hot burn his mouth or his tongue, he may come
to grief thereby; if he come to grief thereby, the man who has
done the deed becomes a Peshotanu
.

3. He who gives too hot food to a dog so as to burn his throat is
margarzan (guilty of death); he who gives bones to a dog so as
to tear his throat is margarzan (
Gr. Riv.
639).

5. 'It is the third of these sins when a man smites a bitch big
with young or affrights her by running after her, or shouting
or clapping with the hands;

6. 'If the bitch fall into a hole, or a well, or a precipice,
or a river, or a canal, she may come to grief thereby; if she
come to grief thereby, the man who has done the deed becomes a
Peshotanu
.

4. If a bitch is big with young [pregnant -JHP] and a man shouts or throws stones
at her, so that the whelps come to mischief and die, he is margarzan
(
Gr. Riv.
639).

7. 'It is the fourth of these sins when a man has intercourse
with a woman who has the whites or sees the blood, the man that
has done the deed becomes a Peshotanu
.

5. [i.e. during menstruation. -JHP]
See
Vd16.14 seq.

8. 'It is the fifth of these sins when a man has intercourse
with a woman quick with child
, whether the milk has already come
to her breasts or has not yet come: she may come to grief thereby;
if she come to grief thereby
, the man who has done the deed becomes
a Peshotanu.

6. When she has been pregnant for four months and ten days, as
it is then that the child is formed and a soul is added to its
body (Anquetil II, 563).

7. Or better; 'if the child die.' 'If a man come to his wife [during
her pregnancy] so that she is injured and bring forth a still-born
child, he is margarzan' (
Old Riv.
115 b).

IIa.

9. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered
, and she conceives by him, let her
not, being ashamed of the people, produce in herself the menses,
against the course of nature, by means of water and plants
.

8. 'Whether she has a husband in the house of her own parents
or has none; whether she has entered from the house of her own
parents into the house of a husband [depending on another chief
of family] or as not' (Comm.)

9. By means of drugs. [i.e. abortion -JHP]

10. 'And if the damsel, being ashamed of the people, shall produce
in herself the menses gainst the course of nature, by means of
water and plants, it is a fresh sin as heavy [as the first]
.

10. 'It is a tanapuhr sin for her: it is sin on sin' (the first
sin being to have allowed herself to be seduced), Comm. 'If there
has been no sin in her (if she has been forced), and if a man,
knowing her shame, wants to take it off her, he shall call together
her father, mother, sisters, brothers, husband, the servants,
the menials, and the master and the mistress of the house, and
he shall say, "This woman is with child by me, and I rejoice
in it;" and they shall answer, "We know it, and we
are glad that her shame is taken off her;" and he shall support
her as a husband does' (Comm.)

11. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered, and she conceives by him, let her not,
being ashamed of the people, destroy the fruit in her womb.

12. 'And if the damsel, being ashamed of the people, shall destroy
the fruit in her womb, the sin is on both the father and herself,
the murder is on both the father and herself; both the father
and herself shall pay the penalty for wilful murder
.

11. For baodhô-varshta; see
Vd7.38
.

IIb.

13. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered, and she conceives by him, and she says,
"I have conceived by thee;" and he replies, "Go
then to the old woman
and apply to her for one of her drugs,
that she may procure thee miscarriage;"

12. The nurse (Framji) or the midwife.

14. 'And the damsel goes to the old woman and applies to her for
one of her drugs, that she may procure her miscarriage; and the
old woman brings her some Banga, or Shaeta, a drug that kills
in the womb or one that expels out of the womb
, or some other
of the drugs that produce miscarriage and [the man says], "Cause
thy fruit to perish!" and she causes her fruit to perish;
the sin is on the head of all three, the man, the damsel, and
the old woman.

13. Banga is bang or mang, a narcotic made from hempseed,
ahaêta is another sort of narcotic.

15. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered, and she conceives by him, so long shall
he support her, until the child be born.

16. 'If he shall not support her, so that the child comes to grief
,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

14. And dies.

17. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If she be near
her time, which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support
her?

18. Ahura Mazda answered: 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either
dependent on the chief of the family or not dependent, either
delivered [unto a husband] or not delivered, and she conceives
by him, so long shall he support her, until the child be born
.

15. §18 = § 15.

19. 'If he shall not support her
....

'It lies with the faithful to look in the same way after every
pregnant female, either two-footed or four-footed, two-footed
woman or four-footed bitch.'

16. The sentence is left unfinished: Framji fills it with the words
in § 16, 'so that the child,' &c. It seems as if §§
17, 18 were not part of the original text, and as if § 17
were a mere repetition of § 20, which being wrongly interpreted
as referring to a woman would have brought about the repetition
of § 15 as an answer. See § 20.

III.

20. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If (a bitch
)
be near her time, which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall
support her?

17. The subject is wanting in the text: it is supplied from the
Commentary and from the sense. [i.e. in heat -JHP]

21. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He whose house stands nearest, the
care of supporting her is his
; so long shall he support her,
until the whelps be born.

18. The bitch is lying on the high road: the man whose house has
its door nearest shall take care of her. If she dies, he shall
carry her off [to dispose of the body according to the law]. One
must support her for at least three nights: if one cannot support
her any longer, one entrusts her to a richer man' (Comm. and Framji).

22. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support; he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

23. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a stable for camels, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

24. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the stable for camels
or whoso holds it
, the care of supporting her is his; so long
shall he support her, until the whelps be born.

19. 'In pledge or for rent' (Framji).

25. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

26. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a stable for horses, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

27. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the stable for horses
or whoso holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long
shall he support her, until the whelps be born.

28. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

29. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a stable for oxen, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

30. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the stable for oxen or
whoso holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall
he support her, until the whelps be born.

31. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

32. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a sheep-fold, which is the worshipper
of Mazda that shall support her?

33. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the sheepfold or whoso
holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he
support her, until the whelps be born.

34. 'If he shall not support her so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

35. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying on the earth-wall
,
which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

20. The wall around the house.

36. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who erected the wall or whoso holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support
her, until the whelps be born.

37. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

38. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in the moat
, which is the worshipper
of Mazda that shall support her?

21. The moat before the earth-wall.

39. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who dug the moat or whoso holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support
her, until the whelps be born.

40. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

41. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in the middle of a pasture-field, which
is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

42. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who sowed the pasture-field or whoso
holds it, the care of supporting her is his; [so long shall he
support her, until the whelps be bo If he shall not support her,
so that the whelps come to grief, for want of proper support,
he shall pay for it the penalty for wilful murder.]

43. 'He shall take her to rest upon a litter of nemovanta or of
any foliage fit for a litter; so long shall he support her, until
the young dogs are capable of self-defence and self-subsistence.'

44. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When are the
dogs capable of self-defence and self-subsistence?

45. Ahura Mazda answered: 'When they
are able to run about in a circuit of twice seven
houses around
. Then they may be let loose,
whether it be winter or summer.

'Young dogs ought to be supported for six
months
, children for seven years
.

'Atar
, the son of Ahura Mazda, watches as well
(over a pregnant bitch) as he does over a woman.'

22. Probably the distance of one yujyeshti; see
Vd8.17
.

23. Catulos sex mensibus primis dum corrohorentur emitti non
oportet... (Columella,
De re agraria
, VII, 12).

24. The age when they are invested with the kusti and sudre, and
become members of the Zoroastrian community.

25. 'When a woman becomes pregnant in a house, it is necessary to
make an endeavor so that there may be a continual fire in that
house, and to maintain a good watch over it. And, when the child
becomes separate from the mother, it is necessary to burn a lamp
for three nights and days -- if they burn a fire it would be better -- so
that the demons and fiends may not be able to do any damage and
harm; because, when a child is born, it is exceedingly delicate
for those three days'
(
Saddar 16
; West,

Pahlavi Texts
, III, 277).

IV.

46. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda want to have a bitch so covered that the offspring shall
be one of a strong nature, what shall they do?

47. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall dig a hole in the earth,
in the middle of the fold half a foot deep if the earth be hard,
half the height of a man if the earth be soft.

48. 'They shall first tie up [the bitch] there, far from children
and from the Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda
, and they shall watch
by her until a dog comes there from anywhere; then another again,
and then a third again
, each being kept apart from the former,
lest they should assail one another.

26. 'From children, lest she shall bite them; from the fire, lest
it shall hurt her' (Comm.)

27. Cf. Justinus III, 4: maturiorem futuram conceptionem rati, si
eam singulae per plures viros experirentur.

49.
'The bitch being thus covered by three dogs, grows big with
young, and the milk comes to her teats and she brings forth a
young one that is born from several dogs.'

28. The text of this and the following clause is corrupt, and the
meaning is doubtful.

50. If a man smite a bitch who has been covered by three dogs,
and who has already milk, and who shall bring forth a young one
born from several dogs, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

51. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seven hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
seven hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

vd15sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 16
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd16sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd16sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 16. Purity laws regarding menstruation.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jun 16, 2001.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

I (1-7). On the uncleanness of women during their sickness.

II (8-12). What is to be done if that state lasts too long.

III (13-18). Sundry laws relating to the same matter. See Introd.
V, 12.

FARGARD 16. Purity laws regarding menstruation

I.

Notes:

1. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If there be
in the house of a worshipper of Mazda a woman who has the whites
or sees blood, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall clear the way
of the wood
there, both plants and trees
; they shall strew dry dust on the
ground
; and they shall isolate a half, or a third, or a fourth,
or a fifth part of the house
, lest her look should fall upon the
fire.'

1. The way of the Dashtânistân.

2. Lest the wood shall be touched and defiled by the woman on
her way to the Dashtanistan.

3. Lest the earth shall be touched and defiled by her.
Cf.
Farg. 9.11
.

4. Nowadays a room on the ground-floor is reserved for that use.

3. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from
the fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated
bundles of Baresma? How far from the faithful?

4. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Fifteen paces from the fire, fifteen
paces from the water, fifteen paces from the consecrated bundles
of Baresma, three paces from the faithful.'

5. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from
her shall he stay, who brings food to a woman who has the whites
or sees the blood?

6. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Three paces
from her shall he stay,
who brings food to a woman who has the whites or sees the blood.'

In what kind of vessels shall he bring her bread? In what
kind of vessels shall he bring her barley-drink?

'In vessels of iron,
or of lead, or of any common metal
.'

5. The food is held out to her from a distance in a metal spoon.

5b. Dar: brass. -JHP

6. Earthen vessels, when defiled, cannot be made clean; but metal
vessels can. See
Farg. 7.73 seq.
)

7. How much bread shall he bring to her? How much barley-drink
shall he bring?

'Two danares
of dry bread, and one danare of liquor, lest
she should get too weak
.

'If a child has just touched her, they shall first wash his
hands and then his body
.

7. A danare is, according to Anquetil, as much as four tolas;
a tola is from 105 to 175 grains.

8. 'Soshyos says: For three nights cooked meat is not allowed
to her, lest the issue shall grow stronger.

9. A child whom she suckles. The meaning is, Even a child, if he has
touched her, must undergo the rites of cleansing. The general rule is
given in the Commentary: 'Whoever has touched a Dashtan woman must
wash his body and his clothes with gomez and water.' The ceremony in
question is the simple Ghosel, not the Barashnum, since the woman
herself performs the former only (see below, § 11 seq.)

II.

8. 'If she still see blood after three nights have passed, she
shall sit in the place of infirmity until four nights have
passed.

'If she still see blood after four nights have passed, she
shall sit in the place of infirmity until five nights have
passed.

9. 'If she still see blood after five nights have passed, she
shall sit in the place of infirmity until six nights have passed.

'If she still see blood after six nights have passed, she
shall sit in the place of infirmity until seven nights have
passed.

10. 'If she still see blood after seven nights have passed, she
shall sit in the place of infirmity until eight nights have
passed.

'If she still see blood after eight nights have passed, she
shall sit in the place of infirmity until nine nights have
passed.

11. 'If she still see blood after nine nights have passed, this
is a work of the Daevas which they have performed for the worship
and glorification of the Daevas
.

'The worshippers of Mazda shall clear the way
of the wood
there, both plants and trees
;

10. Abnormal issues are a creation of Ahriman's
(
Farg. 1.18
).

11. The way of the Barashnum-gah, where the cleansing takes place.

12. See
Farg 9.3 seq.

12. 'They shall dig three holes in the earth, and they shall
wash the woman with gomez by two of those holes and with water by
the third.

'They shall kill Khrafstras, to wit: two hundred
corn-carrying ants
, if it be summer; two hundred of any other
sort of the Khrafstras made by Angra Mainyu, if it be winter.'

13. Cf.
Farg. 14.5
.

III.

13. If a worshipper of Mazda shall suppress the issue of a woman
who has the whites or sees blood, what is the penalty that he
shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'He is a Peshotanu: two hundred
stripes with the Aspahe-astra, two hundred stripes with the
Sraosho-charana.'

14. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man
shall again and again lasciviously touch the body of a woman who
has the whites or sees blood, so that the wlutes turn to the
blood or the blood turns to the whites, what is the penalty that
he shall pay?

15. Ahura Mazda answered: 'For the first time he comes near unto
her, for the first time he lies by her, thirty stripes with the
Aspahe-astra, thirty stripes with the Sraosho-charana.

'For the second time he comes near unto her, for the second
time he lies by her, fifty stripes with the Aspahe-astra, fifty
stripes with the Sraosho-charana.

'For the third time he comes near unto her, for the third
time he lies by her, seventy stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
seventy stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

16. For the fourth time he comes near unto her, for the fourth
time he lies by her, if he shall press the body under her
clothes, if he shall go in between the unclean thighs, but
without sexual intercourse, what is the penalty that he shall
pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ninety stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
ninety stripes with the Sraosho-charana.

17. 'Whosover shall lie in sexual intercourse with a woman who
has the whites or sees blood does no better deed than if he
should burn the corpse of his own son, born of his own body and
dead of naeza
, and drop its fat into the fire
.

14. A disease (
Vd7.58
).
There is another word nâeza, 'a spear,' so that one
may translate also 'killed by the spear' (Asp.)

15. 'Not that the two deeds are equal, but neither is good' (Comm.)
The sin in question is a simple tanapuhr (
Vd15.7
), and
therefore can be atoned for by punishment and repentance, whereas
the burning of a corpse is a crime for which there is no atonement
(
Vd1.17
;
Vd8.73 seq.
)

18. 'All wicked, embodiments of the Druj, are scorners of the
judge: all scorners of the judge are rebels against the
Sovereign: all rebels against the Sovereign are ungodly men; and
all ungodly men are worthy of death
.'

16. Literally, 'is a Peshotanu;' 'he is a tanapuhr sinner, that
is to say, margarzan (worthy of death),' Comm.

vd16sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 17
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd17sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd17sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 17. Hair and nails.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 4, 2001.

Sacred Books of the
East,
American edition, volume 3, New York, 1898.

Anything that has been separated from the body of man is considered
dead matter (nasu), and is accordingly unclean. As soon as hair
and nails are cut off, the demon takes hold of them and has to
he driven away from them by spells, in the same way as he is from
the bodies of the dead.

On similar views and customs in different countries, see
and Queries
, 3rd series, X, 146; Aulus Gellius, X, 15, 15;
Méusine, 1878, pp.79, 549, 583; L. de Rosny,
Histoire des
dynasties divines
, 308.

FARGARD 17. Hair and nails.

I.

Notes:

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
most deadly deed whereby a man offers up a sacrifice to the Daevas
?'

1. Any offense to religion is considered an offering to the Daevas,
whose strength is thereby increased. See
Yt5.95
.

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is when a man here below, combing
his hair or shaving it off, or paring off his nails, drops them

in a hole or in a crack
.

2. Without performing the requisite ceremonies.

3. Doubtful.

3. 'Then by this transgression of the rites, Daevas are produced
in the earth; by this transgression of the rites, those Khrafstras
are produced in the earth which men call lice, and which eat up
the corn in the corn-field and the clothes in the wardrobe.

4. 'Therefore, thou, O Zarathushtra! whenever here below thou
shalt comb thy hair or shave it off, or pare off thy nails, thou
shalt take them away ten paces from the faithful, twenty paces
from the fire, thirty paces from the water, fifty paces from the
consecrated bundles of Baresma.

5. 'Then thou shalt dig a hole, a disti
deep if the earth be
hard, a vitasti deep if it be soft; thou shalt take the hair down
there and thou shalt say aloud these victorious words:

"For him, as a reward, Mazda made the plants grow up
."

4. A dishti = ten fingers. A vitasti = twelve fingers.

5. [
at ah'yâi ashâ mazdå urvarå vaxshat.
]

See above,
Vd11.6
; the choice of this line
was determined by the presence of the word plants in it: man
was considered a microcosm, and every element in him had its
counterpart in nature; the skin is like the sky, the flesh is
like the earth, the bones are like the mountains, the veins are
like the rivers, the blood in the body is like the water in the
sea, the hair is like the plants, the more hairy parts are like
the forests (
Gr. Bund.
) Cf.
Rig-veda
X, 16,3;

Ilias
VII, 99;
Empedocles
, fr. 378;
Epicharmus
ap. Plut. Consol. ad Apoll.
15; Edda,
Grimnismal
; 40.

6. 'Thereupon thou shalt draw three furrows with a knife of metal
around the hole, or six furrows or nine, and thou shall chant
the
Ahuna-Vairya
three times, or six, or nine.

II.

7. 'For the nails, thou shalt dig a hole, out of the house, as
deep as the top joint of the little finger; thou shalt take the
nails down there and thou shalt say aloud these victorious words:

"The things that the pure proclaim through Asha and Vohu-mano
."

6. [
ashâ vohû mananghâ ýâ
sruyê parê magaonô.
]

Yasna 33.7
; understood (with
a play upon the word sruyê 'is heard,' and 'nails of both hands')
as: 'O Asha, with Vohu-mano, the nails of the pure [are for you].'

8. 'Then thou shalt draw three furrows with a knife of metal
around the hole, or six furrows or nine, and thou shalt chant
the Ahuna-Vairya three times, or six, or nine.

9. 'And then:

"O Asho-zushta bird
! these nails I announce
and consecrate unto thee. May they be for thee so many spears
and knives, so many bows and falcon-winged arrows and so many
sling-stones against the Mazainya Daevas
!"

7. [paiti:
tê merekha ashô-zushta imå srvå
vaêdhayemi imå srvå âvaêdhayemi
imåse-tê srvå merekha ashô-zushta hyâre
arshtayasca karetayasca thanvareca ishavasca erezifyô-parena
asanasca fradaxshanya paiti daêvô mâzanyãn.
]

'The owl,' according to modern tradition. The word literally means
'friend of holiness.' 'For the bird Asho-zushta they recite the
Avesta formula; if they recite it, the fiends tremble and do not
take up the nails; but if the nails have had no spell uttered
over them, the fiends and wizards use them as arrows against the
bird Asho-zusta and kill him. Therefore, when the nails have had
a spell uttered over them, the bird takes and eats them up, that
the fiends may not do any harm by their means'
(
Bundahishn
XIX
).
The bird Asho-zusta is also called Bird of Vohuman
(
Saddar
), both names
being taken from the first words of the line quoted above.

8. See above,
Vd10.14, note 13
;

Vd10.16, note 14.

The nails are cut in two and the fragments are put in the hole
with the point directed towards the north, that is to say,
against the breasts of the Devs
(see above,
Vd7.2, note 1
).
See Anquetil,
Zend-Avesta
II, 117; India Office Library, VIII, 80.

10. 'If those nails have not been consecrated (to the bird), they
shall be in the hands of the Mazainya Daevas so many spears and
knives so many bows and falcon-winged arrows, and so many sling-stones
(against the Mazainya Daevas)
.

8. Repeated by mistake from § 10.

11. 'All wicked, embodiments of the Druj, are scorners of the
judge: all scorners of the judge are rebels against the Sovereign:
all rebels against the Sovereign are ungodly men; and all ungodly
men are worthy of death
.'

9. See
preceding Fargard, § 18
.

vd17sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 18
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd18sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd18sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 18.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jun 14, 2001.

Sacred Books of the
East,
American edition, volume 3, New York, 1898.

I (1-13). On the unworthy priest and enticers to heresy.

II (14-29). The holiness of the cock, the bird of Sraosha, who
awakes the world for prayer and for the protection of Atar.

III (30-59). On the four sins, that make the Druj pregnant with
a brood of fiends.

IV (60-65). On the evil caused by the Jahi (the prostitute).

V (66-76). How intercourse with a Dashtân woman is to be
atoned for.

FARGARD 18.

I.

Notes:

1. 'There is many a one, O holy Zarathushtra!' said Ahura Mazda,
'Who wears a wrong Paitidana
, and who has not girded his loins
with the Religion
; When such a man says, "I am an Athravan,"
he lies; do not call him an Athravan, O holy Zarathushtra!' thus
said Ahura Mazda.

1. See above,
Vd14.8, note 19
.

2. The word translated girded is the word used of the Kusti, the sacred
girdle which the Parsi must never part with (see § 54); the full
meaning, therefore, is, 'girded with the law as with a Kusti'
(cf.
Yasna 9.26 [81]
), that is to say,
'never forsaking the law,' or, as the Commentary expresses it,
'one whose thought is all on the law' (cf. § 5).

2. 'He holds a wrong Khrafstraghna
in his hand and he has not
girded his loins with the Religion; when he says, "I am an
Athravan," he lies; do not call him an Athravan, O holy Zarathushtra!
thus said Ahura Mazda.

3. See above,
Vd14.8, note 20.

3. 'He holds a wrong twig
in his hand and he has not girded his
loins with the Religion; when he says, "I am an Athravan,"
he lies; do not call him an Athravan, O holy Zarathushtra!' thus
said Ahura Mazda.

4. The bundles of Baresma [barsom -JHP] or the urvaram
(see
Vd3.1, note 3
and

Vd14.8, note 23
).

4. 'He wields a wrong Ashtra mairya
and he has not girded his
loins with the Religion; when he says, "I am an Athravan,"
he lies; do not call him an Athravan, O holy Zarathushtra!' thus
said Ahura Mazda.

5. The ashtra (Aspahe-ashtra) with which the priest, as a Sraosho-varez,
chastises the guilty.

5. 'He who sleeps on throughout the night, neither performing
the Yasna nor chanting the hymns, worshipping neither by word
nor by deed, neither learning nor teaching, with a longing for
(everlasting) life, he lies when he says, "I am an Athravan,"
do not call him an Athravan, O holy Zarathushtra!' thus said Ahura
Mazda.

6. 'Him thou shalt call an Athravan, O holy Zarathushtra! who
throughout the night sits up and demands of the holy Wisdom
, which
makes man free from anxiety, and wide of heart, and easy of conscience
at the head of the Chinwad bridge
, and which makes him reach that
world, that holy world, that excellent world of Paradise.

6. That is to say, studies the law and learns from those who know
it.

7. See
Vd19.30
. 'It gives him a stout
heart, when standing before the Chinwad bridge' (Comm.)

7. '(Therefore) demand of me, thou upright one! of me, who am
the Maker, the most beneficent of all beings, the best knowing,
the most pleased in answering what is asked of me; demand of me,
that thou mayst be the better, that thou mayst be the happier.'

8. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the material world,
thou Holy One! What is it that brings in the unseen power of Death?'

9. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the man that teaches a wrong
Religion
; it is the man who continues for three springs

without wearing the sacred girdle
, without chanting
the
Gathas
, without worshipping the Good Waters.

8. [akha daêna,
lit.
'bad religion' -JHP]
'The deceiver Ashemaogha' (Comm.); the heretic.
See
Vd15.2

9. 'For three years' (Comm.)

10. The Kusti, which must he worn by every Parsi, man or woman,
from their fifteenth year of age (see below, § 54 seq); it
is the badge of the faithful, the girdle by which he is united
both with Ohrmazd and with his fellow-believers. He who does not
wear it must be refused water and bread by the members of the
community; he who wears it becomes a participator in the merit
of all the good deeds performed all over the Zarathustrian world
(
Saddar 10
and

Saddar 46
).
The Kusti consists 'of seventy-two interwoven
filaments, and should three times circumvent the waist. ... Each
of the threads is equal in value to one of the seventy-two Has
of the
Yasna
; each of the
twelve threads in the six lesser cords is equal in value to the
dawazdih hamaist...; each of the lesser cords is equal in value
to one of the six Gahambars; each of the three circumventions
of the loins is equal in value to
humat
, good thought,

hukht
, good speech,
huaresta
, good work; the
binding of each of the four knots upon it confers pleasure
on each of the four elements, fire, air, water, and the earth'
(Edal Daru, apud Wilson,
The Parsi Religion Unfolded
, p. 163).

Another piece of clothing which every Parsi is enjoined to wear
is the Sudre, or sacred shirt, a muslin shirt with short sleeves,
that does not reach lower than the hips, with a small pocket at
the opening in front of the shirt, the so-called giriban or kissai
karfa, 'the pocket for good deeds.' The faithful man must, while
putting on his Sudre, look at the giriban and ask himself
whether it is full of good deeds.

10. 'And he who should set that man at liberty, when bound in
prison
, does no better deed than if he should cut a man's head
off his neck
.

11. See Introd. III, 10. Cf. § 12.

12. Doubtful. The Commentary seems to understand the sentence as
follows: 'He who should free him from hell would thus perform no
less a feat than if he should cut off the head of a man
and then make him alive again.'

11. 'For the blessing uttered by a wicked, ungodly Ashemaogha
does not go past the mouth (of the blesser); the blessing of two
Ashemaoghas
does not go past the tongue; the blessing of three

is nothing; the blessing of four
turns to self-cursing.

13. Perhaps better: 'The second ..., the third ..., the fourth blessing
of an Ashemaogha.'

12. 'Whosoever should give to a wicked, ungodly Ashemaogha either
some Haoma prepared, or some Myazda consecrated with blessings,
does no better deed than if he should lead a thousand horse against
the boroughs of the worshippers of Mazda, and should slaughter
the men thereof, and drive off the cattle as plunder.

13. 'Demand of me, thou upright one! of me, who am the Maker,
the most beneficent of all beings, the best knowing, the most
pleased in answering what is asked of me; demand of me, that thou
mayst be the better, that thou mayst be the happier.'

II.

14. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Who is the Sraosha-varez

of Sraosha? the holy, strong Sraosha, who is Obedience incarnate,
a Sovereign with an astounding weapon
.'

14. 'Who is he who sets the world in motion?' (Comm.)

15. Sraosha, Srosh, the Genius of Active Piety. He first tied
the Baresma [barsom], sacrificed to Ahura, and sang the Gathas.
Thrice in each day and night he descends upon the earth to smite
Angra Mainyu and his crew of demons. With his club uplifted he
protects the world from the demons of the night, and the dead
from the terrors of death and from the assaults of Angra Mainyu
and Asto-vidotu [Astwihad]. It is through a sacrifice performed by Ohrmazd,
as a Zoti, and Srosh, as a Raspi, that at the end of time Ahriman
will be forever vanquished and brought to nought
(
Yasna 57
,

Yt11
, etc.)

15. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the bird named Parodarsh
, which
ill-speaking people call Kahrkatas
, O holy Zarathushtra! the bird
that lifts up his voice against the mighty Ushah
:

16. 'He who foreshows the coming dawn; the cock.'

17. 'When he is not called so, he is powerful' (Comm.)
See
Vd13.2, 6.

18. Ushah, the second half of the night, from midnight to the dawn. [Ushahin -JHP]

16. '"Arise, O men! recite the
Ashem yad
vahistem
that smites down the Daevas
.
Lo! here is Bushyasta, the long-handed
,
coming upon you, who lulls to sleep again the whole living world,
as soon as it has awoke: 'Sleep!' [she says,] 'O poor man! the
time
is not yet come.'"

19. The cock is 'the drum of the world.' As crowing in the dawn that
dazzles away the fiends, he crows away the demons: 'The cock was
created to fight against the fiends and wizards; ... he is with
the dog an ally of Srosh against demons'
(
Bundahishn 19
). 'No demon
can enter a house in which there is a cock; and, above all, should
this bird come to the residence of a demon, and move his tongue
to chant the praises of the glorious and exalted Creator, that
instant the evil spirit takes to flight' (Mirkhond,
History of
the Early Kings of Persia
, translated by Shea, p. 57; see

Saddar 32
, and J. Ovington,

A Voyage to Suratt
, 1696, p.371).

20. The demon of sleep, laziness, procrastination. She lulls back
to sleep the world as soon as awaked, and makes the faithful forget
in slumber the hour of prayer.

21. 'To perform thy religious duties' (Comm.)

17. '"On the three excellent things be never intent, namely,
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds; on the three abominable
things be ever intent, namely, bad thoughts, bad words, and bad
deeds."

18. 'On the first part of the night, Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda,
calls the master of the house for help, saying:

19. '"Up! arise, thou master of the house! put on thy girdle [[kusti]]
on thy clothes, wash thy hands, take wood, bring it unto me, and
let me burn bright with the clean wood, carried by thy well-washed
hands
. Here comes Azi
, made by the Daevas, who consumes me and
wants to put me out of the world."

22. The Parsi, as soon as he has risen, must put on the kusti, wash
his hands, and put wood on the fire.

23. Âzi, the demon of avidity; he extinguishes the fire, while he
devours the wood.

20. 'On the second part of the night, Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda,
calls the husbandman for help, saying;

21. '"Up! arise, thou husbandman! Put on thy girdle [[kusti]] on thy
clothes, wash thy hands, take wood, bring it unto me, and let
me burn bright with the clean wood, carried by thy well-washed
hands. Here comes Azi, made by the Daevas, who consumes me and
wants to put me out of the world."

22. 'On the third part of the night, Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda,
calls the holy Sraosha for help, saying: "Come thou, holy,
well-formed Sraosha, [then he brings unto me some clean wood with
his well-washed hands
.] Here comes Azi, made by the Daevas, who
consumes me and wants to put me out of the world."

24. The text seems to be corrupt: it must probably be emended into
'bring into me...'

23. 'And then the holy Sraosha wakes up the bird named Parodarsh,
which ill-speaking people call Kahrkatas, and the bird lifts up
his voice against the mighty Ushah:

24. '"Arise, O men! recite the
Ashem yad vahistem

[Ashem Vohu] and the
Naismi daevo
.
Lo! here is Bushyasta, the long-handed,
coming upon you, who lulls to sleep again the whole living world
as soon as it has awoke: 'Sleep!' [she says,] 'O poor man! the time
is not yet come.'"

25. The prayer 'Righteousness is the best of all good...' (the Ashem
Vohu), and the profession of faith [creed]: 'I scorn the Daevas...'
(
Yasna 12.1
).

25. '"On the three excellent things be never intent, namely,
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds; on the three abominable
things be ever intent, namely, bad thoughts, bad words, and bad
deeds."

26. 'And then bed-fellows address one another: "Rise up,
here is the cock calling me up." Whichever of the two first
gets up shall first enter Paradise: whichever of the two shall
first, with well-washed hands, bring clean wood unto Atar, the
son of Ahura Mazda, Atar, well pleased with him and not angry,
and fed as it required, will thus bless him:

27. '"May herds of oxen and sons accrue to thee: may thy
mind be master of its vow, may thy soul be master of its vow,
and mayst thou live on in the joy of thy soul all the nights of
thy life."

'This is the blessing which Atar speaks unto him who brings him
dry wood, well examined by the light of the day, well cleansed
with godly intent.

28. 'And whosoever will kindly and piously present one of the
faithful with a pair of these my Parodarsh birds, a male and a
female, O Spitama Zarathushtra! it is as though he had given
a
house with a hundred columns, a thousand beams, ten thousand large
windows, ten thousand small windows.

26. 'In the day of recompense' (Comm.); he shall he rewarded as
though he had given a house, &c.... he shall receive such a house
in Paradise.

29. 'And whosoever shall give meat to one of the faithful, as
much of it as the body of this Parodarsh bird of mine, I, Ahura
Mazda, need not interrogate him twice; he shall directly go to
Paradise.'

III.

30. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! Thou then, alone in the
material world, dost bear offspring without any male coming unto
thee?'

31. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! It
is not so, nor do I, alone in the material world, bear offspring
without any male coming unto me.

32. 'For there are four males of mine; and they make me conceive
progeny as other males make their females conceive by their seed
.'

27. Sin makes the Druj mother of a spontaneous progeny, as the sinner
is 'the brood of the Druj' (
Yasna 61.10
).

33. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! Who is the first of those
males of thine?'

34. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! He
is the first of my males who, being entreated by one of the faithful,
does not give him anything, be it ever so little, of the riches
he has treasured up
.

28. See
Vd3.34
.

35. 'That man makes me conceive progeny as other males make their
females conceive by their seed.'

36. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! What is the thing that
can undo that?'

37. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! This
is the thing that undoes it, namely, when a man unasked, kindly
and piously, gives to one of the faithful something, be it ever
so little, of the riches he has treasured up.

38. 'He does thereby as thoroughly destroy the fruit of my womb
as a four-footed wolf does, who tears the child out of a mother's
womb.'

39. The holy Sraosha, letting down his club upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! Who is the second of those
males of thine?'

40. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! He
is the second of my males who, making water, lets it fall along
the upper forepart of his foot.

41. 'That man makes me conceive progeny as other males make
their females conceive by their seed.'

42. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked
the Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! What is the thing
that can undo that?'

43. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, wall-formed Sraosha! This
is the thing that undoes it, namely, when the man rising up
and
stepping three steps further off, shall say three

Ahuna-Vairya
,
two humatanam
, three hukhshathrotemam
,
and then chant the Ahuna-Vairya

and offer up one Yenhe hatam
.

29. 'Nec stando mingens ... facile visitur Persa' (Amm. Marc.
XXIII, 6);
Arda Viraf
;

Menog i Khrad 2.39
;

Saddar
56.

Cf. Manu IV, 47 seq., and Polack,
Persien
I, 67: 'Von einem in
Paris weilenden Perser hinterbrachte man dem König, um seine
Emancipation und Abtrünnigkeit vom Gesetz za beweisen, dass
er Schweinefleisch esse und stehend die Function verrichte.'

30. See
Vd8.19
.

31.
Yasna 35.2
: one of the Bish-amruta
(
Vd10.4
).

32.
Yasna 35.5
: one of the
Thrish-amruta (
Vd10.8
).

33. Making four Ahunwars in all; see
Vd10.12
.

34. See
Yasna 21
.

44. 'He does thereby as thoroughly destroy the fruit of my womb
as a four-footed wolf does, 'who tears the child out of a mother's
womb.'

45. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! Who is the third of those
males of thine?'

46. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! He
is the third of my males who during his sleep emits seed.

47. 'That man makes me conceive progeny as other males make their
females conceive progeny by their seed.'

48. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! What is the thing that
can undo that?'

49. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! this
is the thing that undoes it, namely, if the man, when he has risen
from sleep, shall say three Ahuna-Vairya, two humatanam, three
hukhshathrotemam, and then chant the Ahuna-Vairya and offer up
one Yenhe hatam.

35. See § 43 and notes.

50. 'He does thereby as thoroughly destroy the fruit of my womb
as a four-footed wolf does who tears the child out of a mother's
womb.'

51. Then he shall speak unto Spenta Armaiti
, saying: 'O Spenta
Armaiti, this man do I deliver unto thee
; this man deliver thou
back unto me, against the happy day of resurrection; deliver him
back as one who knows the Gathas, who knows the Yasna
, and the
revealed Law
, a wise and clever man, who is Obedience incarnate.

36. The Genius of the Earth (see
Vd2.10
).

37. In the same way as she received the seed of the dying Gayomard,
from which she let grow, in the shape of a plant, the first human
couple, Mashye and Mashyane (
Bund.
15.1-2
).

38. The
Yasna Haptanhaiti
.

37. Literally, 'the answers made to the questions (of Zarathushtra).'

52. 'Then thou shalt call his name "Fire-creature, Fire-seed,
Fire-offspring, Fire-land," or any name wherein is the word
Fire
.'

38. Atar, the Fire, is the ideal father of the son to be born, as
Spenta Armaiti, the Earth, is his ideal mother. The fire is considered
male (
Denkard
, apud West, Pahlavi Texts, II, 410) and (as Apam
Napat) has made and shaped man (
Yt19.52
).

53. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj! Who is the fourth of those
males of thine?'

54. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha!
This one is my fourth male who, either man or woman, being more
than fifteen years of age, walks without wearing the sacred girdle
and the sacred shirt
.

39. The kusti and the sudre; see above,
§ 9, note 10
. It is the
sin known as kushâd duvârishnî
(
Menog i Khrad
2.35
;

Arda Viraf 25.6
).

55. 'At the fourth step
we Daevas, at once, wither him even to
the tongue and the marrow, and he goes thenceforth with power
to destroy the world of Righteousness, and he destroys it like
the Yatus and the Zandas
.'

40. 'Going three steps without kusti is only a three Sraosho-charana
sin; from the fourth step, it is a tanapuhr sin' (Comm.)

41. The Yatu is a sorcerer; the Zanda is an apostle of Ahriman.
[i.e.
zandiks
(heretics) -JHP]

56. The holy Sraosha, letting his club down upon her, asked the
Druj: 'O thou wretched, worthless Druj, what is the thing that
can undo that?'

57. The Druj demon answered: 'O holy, well-formed Sraosha! There
is no means of undoing it;

58.
'When a man or a woman, being more than fifteen years of age,
walks without wearing the sacred girdle or the sacred shirt [[kusti and sudre]].

59.
'At the fourth step we Daevas, at once, wither him even to
the tongue and the marrow, and he goes thenceforth with power
to destroy the world of Righteousness, and he destroys it like
the Yatus and the Zandas.'

IV.

60.
Demand of me, thou upright one! of me who am the Maker, the
most beneficent of all beings, the best knowing, the most pleased
in answering what is asked of me; demand of me that thou mayst
be the better, that thou mayst be the happier.

61.
Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Who grieves thee with the
sorest grief? Who pains thee with the sorest pain?'

62. Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the Jahi
, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! who mixes in her the seed of the faithful and the
unfaithful, of the worshippers of Mazda and the worshippers of
the Daevas, of the wicked and the righteous
.

42. The courtesan, as an incarnation of the female demon Jahi.
[i.e. prostitute. Pahlavi equivalent is "jeh"
(see
Bundahishn

and
Denkard
Book 9, chapter 11
)
Kanga, in his
Avestan Dictionary
says that a Jahi is
a rake, a libertine, one who leads a licentious life (p. 191) -JHP].

43. '[Whether she gives up her body to the faithful or to the unfaithful],
there is no difference; when she has been with three men, she
is guilty of death' (Comm.)

63. 'Her look dries up one-third of the mighty floods that run
from the mountains, O Zarathushtra; her look withers one-third
of the beautiful, golden-hued, growing plants, O Zarathushtra;

64. 'Her look withers one-third of the strength of Spenta Armaiti
;
and her touch withers in the faithful one-third of his good thoughts,
of his good words, of his good deeds, one-third of his strength,
of his victorious power, and of his holiness
.

44. The earth.

45. 'If a Jahi (courtesan) look at running waters, they fall; if
at trees, they are stunted; if she converse with a pious man,
his intelligence and his holiness are withered by it'
(
Saddar
). Cf. Manu IV, 40 seq.

65. 'Verily I say unto thee, O Spitama Zarathushtra! such creatures
ought to be killed even more than gliding snakes
, than howling
wolves, than the wild she-wolf that falls upon the fold, or than
the she-frog that falls upon the waters with her thousandfold
brood.'

46. It is written in the law (the
Avesta
): 'O Zartosht Spitaman!
with regard to woman, I say to thee that any woman that has
given up her body to two men in one day is sooner to he killed
than a wolf, a lion, or a snake: any one who kills such a woman
will gain as much merit by it as if he had provided with wood
a thousand fire-temples, or destroyed the dens of adders, scorpions,
lions, wolves, or snakes' (
Old Riv.
59 b).

V.

66.
Demand of me, thou upright one! of me who am the Maker, the
most beneficent of all beings, the best knowing, the most pleased
in answering what is asked of me; demand of me that thou mayst
be the better, that thou mayst be the happier.

67-68. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'If a man shall come unto
a woman who has the whites or sees blood, and he does so wittingly
and knowingly
, and she allows it willfully, wittingly, and knowingly,
what is the atonement for it, what is the penalty that he shall
pay to atone for the deed they have done?'

47. [i.e. while menstruating -JHP]
'Knowing her state and knowing that it is a sin' (Comm.)

69. Ahura Mazda answered: 'If a man shall come unto a woman who
has the whites or sees blood, and he does so wittingly and knowingly,
and she allows it willfully, wittingly, and knowingly;

70. 'He shall slay a thousand head of small cattle; he shall godly
and piously offer up to the fire
the entrails
thereof together
with Zaothra-libations
; he shall bring the shoulder bones to the
Good Waters
.

48. To the Warharan fire.

49. The omentum (afsman) or epipleon. Catullus, describing
the sacrifice of the Magi, has: '... Accepto veneretur carmine divos /
Omentum in flamma pingue liquefaciens'
(LXXXIX [i.e.
Carmen 90
].
Strabo XV, 13:
tou epiplou ti mikron tiqeasi,
wV legousi tineV, epi to pur
.
'Ascending six steps they showed me in a Room adjoining to
the temple, their Fire which they fed with Wood, and sometimes
Burn on it the Fat of the Sheep's Tail.'
A Voyage Round the World,

Dr. J. F. Gemelli, 1698.

50. The ceremony here described is nearly fallen into desuetude:
it is the so-called Zohr-atash (zaothra for the fire), which is
for the fire what the Zohr-ab is for the waters.

51. This is the Zohr-ab. According to the

Shayest
(11.4)
, when an animal
is immolated, the heart is offered to the fire and the
shoulder is offered to the waters.

71. 'He shall godly and piously bring unto the fire a thousand
loads of soft wood, of Urvasna, Vohu-gaona, Vohu-kereti, Hadha-naepata,
or of any sweet-scented plant
.

52. See
Vd14.3 seq.

72. 'He shall tie and consecrate a thousand bundles of Baresma;
he shall godly and piously offer up to the Good Waters a thousand
Zaothra-libations, together with the Haoma and the milk, cleanly
prepared and well strained, — cleanly prepared and well strained
by a pious man, and mixed with the roots of the tree known as
Hadha-naepata
.

53. See
Vd14.4
, and

Vd14.8, n. 23
.

73. 'He shall kill a thousand snakes of those that go upon the
belly, two thousand of the other kind; he shall kill a thousand
land-frogs and two thousand water-frogs; he shall kill a thousand
corn-carrying ants and two thousand of the other kind
.

54. See
Vd14.5
.

74. 'He shall throw thirty bridges over canals; he shall undergo
a thousand stripes with the Aspahe-astra, a thousand stripes with
the Sraosho-charana
.

55. Five tanapuhrs, that is six thousand dirhems.

75. 'This is the atonement, this is the penalty that he shall
pay to atone for the deed that he has done.

76. 'If he shall pay it, he makes himself a viaticum into the
world of the holy ones; if he shall not pay it, he makes himself
a viaticum into the world of the wicked, into that world, made
of darkness, the offspring of darkness, which is Darkness' self
.'

56. See
Vd5.62
.

vd18sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 19
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd19sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd19sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 19.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jun 14, 2001.

,
American Edition, (New York, The Christian Literature Company, 1898.)

Comments in [] by JHP.

Compare this chapter with the ancient description given of it in

the Denkard, Dk Book 8.74-76:

(74) About the combat (kushishno) of the evil: spirit with Zartosht,
the victory of Zartosht therein, and whatever is on the same subject.
(75) About Zartosht having inquired of Ohrmazd how, and by what means,
one has to confound the evil spirit and other demons, and his reply.
(76) About the gratification of Vohuman, the archangel, owing to
the washing and bringing back to use of polluted clothing; also
praise unto Ohrmazd for his narrating the care of the clothing.

Synopsis:

I (§§ 1-3).
Angra Mainyu sends
the demon Buiti to kill Zarathushtra:
Zarathushtra sings aloud the Ahunwar, and the demon flies
away, confounded by the sacred words and by the glory of Zarathushtra.

Ia (§§ 4-10).

Angra Mainyu himself attacks him and propounds riddles to be
solved under pain of death. The Prophet rejects him with heavenly
stones, given by Ahura, and announces to him that he will destroy his
creation. The demon promises him the empire of the world if he
adores him, as his ancestors have done, and abjures the religion of
Mazda. Zarathushtra rejects his offers scornfully. He announces
he will destroy him with the arms given by Ahura, namely, the
sacrificial implements and the sacred words. Then he recites the

Tat thwa peresa
,
that is to say, the Gatha in which he asks Ahura
for instruction on all the mysteries of the material and spiritual
world.

The rest of the Fargard contains specimens of the several questions
asked by Zarathushtra and the answers given by Ahura. It is
an abridgement of the Revelation (cf.
Hadokht Nask
).

II (11-17)
. How to destroy the uncleanness born from a contact
with the dead? — By invoking the Mazdean Religion. A series of
invocations taught by Ahura and developed by Zarathushtra
(15-16)

III (18-19)
. How to promote the prosperity of the creation? —
By the rites of the Baresman [
barsom
].

IV (20-25)
. How to purify man and clothes defiled by the
dead? — With gomez, water, and perfume.

V (26-34)
. On the remuneration of deeds after death; on the
fate of the wicked and the righteous; the Chinwad bridge.

IIa (34-42)
. Another series of invocations.

VI (43-47)
. The demons, dismayed by the birth of the Prophet,
rush back into hell.

As may be seen from the preceding analysis, the essential part
of this Fargard are sections
I
and
VI
,
the rest being an indefinite
development. It appears also from
section VI
, that the attacks of
Buiti and Angra Mainyu against Zarathushtra and the attempts to
seduce him are supposed to take place at the moment when he was
born, which is confirmed by the testimony of the

Warsht-mansr Nask
(West, Pahlavi Texts, IV, 226 seq.)

FARGARD 19.

I.

1. From the region of the north, from the regions
of the north
, forth rushed Angra Mainyu, the deadly,
the Daeva of the Daevas
. And thus spake the
evil-doer Angra Mainyu, the deadly: 'Druj, rush
down and kill him,' O holy Zarathushtra! The
Druj came rushing along, the demon Buiti
, who
is deceiving, unseen death
.

Notes:

1. From hell; cf. II, 10n; III, 7 n;
Hadokht Nask 25
;

Bundahishn 15.19
.

2. 'The fiend of fiends,' the arch-fiend.

3. Buiti is identified by the
Greater Bundahishn
with the Bût, the
idol, worshipped by Budasp (a corruption of Bodhisativa). Buiti [Buddha]
would be therefore a personification of Buddhism, which was
flourishing in Eastern Iran in the two centuries before and after
Christ. Buidhi (
Vd11.9
may be another and more correct
pronunciation of Bodhi.

4. Idolatry (cf. note 3) being the death of the soul.

2. Zarathushtra chanted aloud the Ahuna-Vairya
:

'The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness. The gifts of Vohu-mano to
the deeds done in this world for Mazda. He who relieves the poor
makes Ahura king.'

He offered the sacrifice to the good waters of the good
Daitya
! He recited the profession of the worshippers of
Mazda
!

The Druj dismayed, rushed away, the demon Buiti, who is
deceiving, unseen death.

5. [i.e.
Ahunwar
], a prayer in frequent use, and considered of great efficacy.
It was by reciting it that Ohrmazd in his first conflict with Ahriman drove
him back to hell (
Bund 1
).

6. The river in Eranwej; see
Vd1.3
.

7. The
Fravarane
(
Y11.16
).

3. And the Druj said unto Angra Mainyu:
'Thou, tormenter, Angra Mainyu! I see no way to
kill Spitama Zarathushtra, so great is the glory of
the holy Zarathushtra.'

Zarathushtra saw (all this) within his soul: 'The
wicked, the evil-doing Daevas (thought he) take
counsel together for my death.'

I a.

4. Up started Zarathushtra, forward went Zarathushtra, unabated
by Akem-mano
, by the hardness of his malignant riddles
; he went
swinging stones in his hand, stones as big as a house
, which he
obtained from the Maker, Ahura Mazda, he the holy Zarathushtra.

'Whereat on this wide, round earth, whose ends
lie afar, whereat dost thou swing (those stones),
thou who standest by the upper bank of the river
Dareja
, in the mansion of Pourushaspa
?'

8. See
Vd10.10 n.

9. This is a fragment of an old legend in which Zarathushtra and
Angra Mainyu played respectively the parts of Oedipus and the
Sphinx. Cf.
Yt5.81
, where the same
legend is told in nearly
the same terms of the sorcerer Ahktya and Yavisht i Friyan.
[See also the Pahlavi Text
Yavisht i Friyan
.]

10. The Commentary has, 'Some say, those stones are the Ahunwar.'
If one keeps in mind how much the Moslem legend of
Ibrahim owes to the legend of Zarathushtra, one may easily admit
that this passage in our text is the origin of the story of how Iblis
tempted Ibrahim, and was pelted away, whence he was named 'the stoned
One' (ar-ragîmû).

11. 'The Daraja is the chief of the rivers, because the house of
Zartosht's father stood on its bank and Zartosht was born there'
(
Bund24.15
.)

12. The father of Zarathushtra.

5. Thus Zarathushtra answered Angra Mainyu: 'O evil-doer, Angra
Mainyu! I will smite the creation of the Daeva; I will smite the
Nasu, a creature of the Daeva; I will smite the Pairika
Knathaiti
, till the victorious Saoshyant come up to life
out of
the lake Kasava [Kasaoya]
, from the region of the dawn, from the regions
of the dawn.'

13. The incarnation of idolatry; cf.
Vd1.9
.

14. The unborn son of Zarathushtra, who, at the end of time, will
destroy Ahriman and bring about the resurrection of the dead.
See
Yt13.62
;
Yt19.92, 94 seq
.

15. The Zarah sea in Saistan. See
Yt19.66
.

6. Again to him said the Maker of the evil world, Angra Mainyu:
'Do not destroy my creatures, O holy Zarathushtra! Thou art the
son of Pourushaspa;
by thy mother I was invoked.
Renounce the
good Religion of the worshippers of Mazda, and thou shalt gain
such a boon as Vadhaghna
gained, the ruler of the nations.'

16. 'I know thee' (Comm.)

17. The Commentary has, 'Some explain thus: Thy forefathers
worshipped me: worship me also.' Zarathushtra's forefathers must
naturally have followed a false religion, since he announces the
true one.

18. Azhi Dahaka or Zohak, who, as a legendary king, is said to
have ruled the world for a thousand years. See
Mx57.24-25:

"Ahriman shouted to Zartosht thus: "If thou desist from
this good religion of the Mazda-worshippers, then I will give thee
a thousand years' dominion of the worldly existence, as was given
to the Vadakan monarch Dahak [Zohak]." "

7. Spitama Zarathushtra said in answer: 'No!
never will I renounce the good Religion of the worshippers
of Mazda, either for body or life, though
they should tear away the breath!'

8. Again to him said the Maker of the evil
world, Angra Mainyu: 'By whose Word wilt thou
strike, by whose Word wilt thou repel, by whose
weapon will the good creatures (strike and repel)
my creation, who am Angra Mainyu?'

9. Spitama Zarathushtra said in answer: 'The
sacred mortar, the sacred cups, the Haoma, the
Word taught by Mazda, these are my weapons,
my best weapons! By this Word will I strike,
by this Word will I repel, by this weapon will the
good creatures (strike and repel thee), O evil-doer,
Angra Mainyu! The Good Spirit [Spenta Mainyu -JHP] made the creation
;
he made it in the boundless Time. The
Amesha-Spentas made the creation, the good, the wise Sovereigns.'

19. The first duty of every good Mazda-worshipper is to think of
Ohrmazd as the creator, and of Ahriman as the destroyer
(
Mx2.9
).

10. Zarathushtra chanted aloud the Ahuna-Vairya.

The holy Zarathushtra said aloud: 'This I ask thee: teach me
the truth, O Lord
! ...'

20. This verse is the beginning of the
Tat thwa peresa

Gatha (Yasna 44); see the
introduction to this Fargard
.

II.

11. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O
Ahura Mazda, most beneficent spirit, Maker of the

material world, thou Holy One! [he was sitting by
the upper bank of the Dareja
, before Ahura Mazda,
before the good Vohu-mana, before Asha Vahishta,
Khshathra Vairya, and Spenta Armaiti;]

21. See note 11 above.

12. 'How shall I free the world from that
Druj, from that evil-doer, Angra Mainyu? How
shall I drive away direct defilement? How indirect
defilement? How shall I drive the Nasu from the
house of the worshippers of Mazda? How shall
I cleanse the faithful man? How shall I cleanse
the faithful woman?'

13. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Invoke, O
Zarathushtra! the good Religion of Mazda.

'Invoke, O Zarathushtra! though thou see them
not, the Amesha-Spentas who rule over the seven
Karshvares of the earth
.

'Invoke, O Zarathushtra! the sovereign Heaven,
the boundless Time
, and Vayu
, whose action is
most high.

'Invoke, O Zarathushtra! the powerful Wind,
made by Mazda; and Spenta [Armaiti]
, the fair
daughter of Ahura Mazda.

22. See verse 39.

23. By contradistinction to the duration of the world, which is
limited to 12,000 years (
Bund34.1
).

24. The Genius of Destiny; see
Vd5.9
.

25. The fourth Amesha-Spenta, who in her spiritual character is
an incarnation of pious humility and in her material character
the Genius of the Earth; see
Vd2.10
.

14. 'Invoke, O Zarathushtra! my Fravashi
,
who am Ahura Mazda, the greatest, the best, the
fairest of all beings, the most solid, the most intelligent,
the best shapen, the highest in holiness, and
whose soul is the holy Word [manthra spenta]
!

'Invoke, O Zarathushtra! this creation of mine, who am Ahura
Mazda.'

26. On the Fravashis, see
Yt13
.

27. See
Yasna 1.1
.

15. Zarathushtra imitated my words from me,
(and said): 'I invoke the holy creation of Ahura
Mazda.

'I invoke Mithra
, the lord of the rolling countryside,
a god armed with beautiful weapons, with the
most glorious of all weapons, with the most victorious
of all weapons.

'I invoke the holy, well-formed Sraosha
, who
wields a club in his hand, to bear upon the heads
of the fiends
.

28. See
Vd3.1 n 6
.

29. See
Vd18.14, note.

30. See
Vd18.22 ff.
;

Yasna 57.19 ff
;

Yt11
.

16. 'I invoke the most glorious Holy Word [manthra spenta].

'I invoke the sovereign Heaven, the boundless Time, and
Vayu, whose action is most high.

'I invoke the mighty Wind, made by Mazda, and Spenta
(Armaiti), the fair daughter of Ahura Mazda.

'I invoke the good Religion of Mazda, the fiend-destroying
Law of Zarathushtra.'

III.

17. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the good world,
Ahura Mazda! With what manner of sacrifice shall I worship, with
what manner of sacrifice shall I make people worship this
creation of Ahura Mazda
?'

31. The sacrifice intended is a sacrifice to nature. The Baresman,
as representative of the vegetal nature, receives the zaothra-libations,
which are representative of the fertilizing rains.

18. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Go, O Spitama

Zarathushtra! towards the high-growing trees
, and before one of them that is
beautiful, high-growing, and mighty, say thou these words: "Hail
to thee! O good, holy tree, made by Mazda! Ashem vohu
!"

32. The tree, whatever it is, from which the Baresma is taken.

33. See verse 22.

19. '[The priest] shall cut off a twig of
Baresma, long as an aesha, thick as a yava
.
The faithful one, holding it in his left
hand, shall keep his eyes upon it without ceasing
, whilst he is
offering up to Ahura Mazda and to the Amesha-Spentas, the high
and beautiful golden Haomas, and Good Thought and the good Rata
,
made by Mazda, holy and excellent.'

34. Perhaps: 'long as a ploughshare, thick as a barleycorn.' See
the English system of measures, in which three barleycorns = one
inch.—See
Nirangistan 90
.

35. The Parsis are recommended to keep their eyes on the Barsom
during the sacrifice: 'A man is
offering
the Dron
, he has said all the required
Avesta
, but he has not
looked at the Barsom: what is the rule? It would have been better if he
had looked at it; however he may proceed to the meal' (Old Rav. 97 b).
See
Tahmuras Fragments
, 30-31.

36. Rata impersonates the liberalities done by men to God (as offerings)
and by God to men (as riches, etc.)

IV.

20. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O thou,
all-knowing Ahura Mazda! thou art never asleep,
never intoxicated, thou Ahura Mazda! Vohu-mano

gets directly defiled: Vohu-mano gets indirectly
defiled; the Daevas defile him from the bodies
smitten by the Daevas
: let Vohu-mano be made
clean.'

37. Vohu-mano is often used as a designation of the faithful one,
literally, 'the good-minded;' this is the meaning which is given
to it in this passage by the Commentary, and it certainly belongs
to it in the second part of verse 24; but in the first part of the
same clause it is translated 'clothes,' a meaning which is not unlikely
in itself, as Vohu-mano, being the Amahraspand of cattle, may designate,
and in fact did designate, the skins of cattle and leather (Comm.
ad Farg. XVIII, 2). On the whole the description in the text applies
to the cleansing both of the man and of the clothes, and Vohu-mano
sometimes means the one, and sometimes the other.—From the first
meaning is derived the modern use of Vahman, 'Such a one,' 'N.'

38. From dead bodies.

21. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thou shalt
take some gomez from a bull ungelded and such as
the law requires it
. Thou shalt take
the man who is to be cleansed to the field made by Ahura
, and
the man that is to cleanse him shall draw the furrows
.

39. The so-called Varasiô; 'it must be or a white colour; if a single
hair on its body be found other than white, the animal
is rejected as unfit for the purpose' (Sorabji Kavasji Khambata,
in the Indian Antiquary, VII, 180). On the preparation of the
gomez, see Wilson,
Parsi Religion Unfolded
, pp. 434-435.

40. The place of the cleansing, the Barashnum-gâh (see

Vd9.3
). [Also see
Modi,

Funeral Ceremonies of the Parsees (Bombay, 1928)
]

41. See
Vd9.10
.

22. 'He shall recite a hundred Ashem vohu: "Holiness is the best
of all good: it is also happiness. Happy the man who is holy
with perfect holiness!"

'He shall chant two hundred Ahuna-Vairya: "The will of the
Lord is the law of righteousness. The gifts of Vohu-mano to the
deeds done in this world for Mazda! He who relieves the poor
makes Ahura king."

'He shall wash himself four times with the

gomez from the ox, and twice with the water made
by Mazda
.

42. 'Or better six times with the gomez and thrice with the water'
(Comm.; see
Vd8.37 ff.
;

Vd9.28 ff.
)

23. 'Thus Vohu-mano shall be made clean, and clean shall be the
man. The man shall take up Vohu-mano
with the left arm and the
right, with the right arm and the left: and thou shalt lay down
Vohu-mano under the mighty light of the heavens by the light of
the stars made by the gods, until nine nights have passed away
.

43. 'The clothes' (Comm.)

44. The clothes of the unclean shall be exposed to the air for nine
nights, all the time while be himself is confined in the Armesht-gah.
The rules for the cleansing of clothes that have been worn by
the dead himself are different (see
Vd7.12 ff.
)

24. 'When nine nights have passed away,
thou shalt bring libations unto the fire, thou shalt
bring hard wood unto the fire, thou shalt bring
incense of Vohu-gaona unto the fire, and thou
shalt perfume Vohu-mano therewith.

25. 'Thus shall Vohu-mano be made clean,
and clean shall be the man
. He shall take up
Vohu-mano with the right arm and the left, with
the left arm and the right, and Vohu-mano
shall
say aloud: "Glory be to Ahura Mazda! Glory be
to the Amesha-Spentas! Glory be to all the other
holy beings."'

45. 'Thus Vohu-mano shall be clean—the clothes; thus the man
shall be clean—he who wears those clothes' (Comm.)

46. The faithful one.

V.

26. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O
thou all-knowing Ahura Mazda: Should I urge

upon the godly man, should I urge upon the godly
woman, should I urge upon the wicked Daeva-worshipper
who lives in sin, to give the earth
made by Ahura, the water that runs, the corn
that grows, and all the rest of their wealth
?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thou shouldst, O holy Zarathushtra.'

47. See verse 29 end.

27. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Where are the
rewards given? Where does the rewarding take place? Where is
the rewarding fulfilled? Whereto do men come to take the reward
that, during their life in the material world, they have won for
their souls?

28. Ahura Mazda answered: 'When the man is dead, when his time
is over, then the wicked, evil-doing Daevas cut off his eyesight.
On the third night, when the dawn appears and brightens up, when
Mithra, the god with beautiful weapons, reaches the all-happy
mountains, and the sun is rising:

29. 'Then the fiend, named Vizaresha
,
O Spitama Zarathushtra, carries off in bonds
the
souls of the wicked Daeva-worshippers who live
in sin. The soul enters the way made by Time,
and open both to the wicked and to the righteous.
At the head of the Chinwad bridge, the holy bridge

made by Mazda
, they ask for their spirits and souls
the reward for the worldly goods which they gave
away here below
.

48. The demon Vizaresh is he who, during that struggle of three
days and three nights with the souls of the departed, carries
terror on them and beats them: he sits at the gate of hell
(
Bund. 28.18
).

49. 'Every one has a noose cast around his neck: when a man
dies, if he has been a righteous man, the noose falls from his neck;
if a wicked, they drag him with that noose down into hell' (Comm.;
see
Vd5.8
).

50. The Chinwad bridge extends over hell and leads to Paradise;
for the souls of the righteous it widens to the length of nine javelins;
for the souls of the wicked it narrows to a thread, and they fall
down into hell (see
Arda Viraf 5.1
;

Denkard Book 9, chapter 20.3
).
The Chinwad bridge has become the Sirath bridge of the Moslems. Not long
ago they sang in Yorkshire of 'the Brig o' Dread, na brader than
a thread' (Thorns, Anecdotes, 89), and even nowadays the peasants
in Nièvre tells of a little board --

'Pas pu longue, pas pu large

Qu'un ch'veu de la Sainte Viarge,'

which was put by Saint Jean d'Archange between the earth and
Paradise:

'Ceux qu'saront la raison (=l'oraison?) d'Dieu

Par dessus passeront.

Ceux qu'la sauront pas

Au bout mourront.' (Mélusine, p. 70.)

51. See verse 26, and
Vd3.34-5
;

Vd18.33 ff
.

30. 'Then comes the beautiful, well-shapen,
strong and well-formed maid
, with the dogs at her
sides
, one who can distinguish
, who has many
children
, happy, and of high understanding.

'She makes the soul of the righteous one go
up above the Hara-berezaiti
; above the Chinwad

bridge she places it in the presence of the heavenly gods themselves.

52. The soul of the dead, on the fourth day, finds itself in the
presence of a maid, of divine beauty or fiendish ugliness,
according as he himself was good or bad, and she leads him into
heaven or hell: this maid is his own Daena, his Religion [daena also means
conscience], that is the sum of his religious deeds, good or evil
(
Hadokht Nask, section 2.9
).
[See also
Dadestan-i Denig
chapter 21
.]

53. The dogs that keep the Chinwad bridge (see
Vd13.9
).

54. the good from the wicked.

55. Doubtful. Those children would he the righteous, as the sons of
the Druj are the wicked (
Vd18.30 ff.
)

56. The Chinwad bridge rests by one end on the Alborz (Hara-berezaiti)
and by the other on the Chikad Daitik in Eranwej (Comm. ad 101
ed. Sp.;
Denkard IX, 20, 3
).

31. 'Up rises Vohu-mano
from his golden
seat; Vohu-mano exclaims: "How hast thou come
to us, thou Holy One, from that decaying world into
this undecaying one
?"

57. The doorkeeper of Paradise; a Zoroastrian Saint-Pierre [St. Peter].

58. See
Vd7.52
;

Hadhokht Nask, part 2.16
.

32. 'Gladly pass the souls of the righteous
to the golden seat of Ahura Mazda, to the golden
seat of the Amesha-Spentas, to the Garo-nmanem
,
the abode of Ahura Mazda, the abode of the
Amesha-Spentas, the abode of all the other holy beings.

59. The Garothman of the Parsis; literally, 'the house of songs;'
it is the highest Paradise.

33. 'As to the godly man that has been cleansed
, the wicked
evil-doing Daevas tremble at the perfume of his soul after death,
as doth a sheep on which a wolf is pouncing
.

60. That has performed the Barashnum.

61. Ohrmazd is all perfume, Ahriman is infection and stench
(
Bundahishn 1
; Eznig, Refutatio
Haeresiarum II); the souls of their followers partake of the same
qualities; and by the performance of the Barashnum both the body
and the soul are perfumed and sweetened.

34. 'The souls of the righteous are gathered together there:
Nairyo-sangha
is with them; a messenger of Ahura Mazda is
Nairyo-sangha.

62. See
Vd22.7
.

Ila.

'Invoke, O Zarathushtra! this very creation of Ahura Mazda.'

35. Zarathushtra imitated those words of

mine: 'I invoke the holy world, made by Ahura Mazda.

'I invoke the earth made by Ahura, the water made by Mazda,
the holy trees.

'I invoke the sea Vouru-kasha
.

'I invoke the beautiful Heaven
.

'I invoke the endless and sovereign Light
.'

63. See
Vd5.15 ff
.

64. Asman, the highest heaven, as distinguished from the firmament
(thwasha) that lies nearer the earth.

65. The endless Light is 'the place of Ormazd'
(
Bund. 1
); it is
Infinite Space conceived as luminous.

36. 'I invoke the bright, blissful Paradise of the Holy Ones.

'I invoke the Garo-nmanem, the abode of Ahura Mazda, the
abode of the Amesha-Spentas, the abode of all the other holy
beings.

'I invoke the sovereign Place of Eternal Weal
,
and the Chinwad bridge made by Mazda.

66. Misvâna gâtva, another name of the heavenly spaces; it
designates heaven as the abode and source of all blessings,
of all
savah
, or
saoka
.

37. 'I invoke the good Saoka
, who has the good eye.

'I invoke the whole creation of weal.

'I invoke the mighty Fravashis
of the righteous.

'I invoke Verethraghna
, made by Ahura, who
wears the Glory made by Mazda
.

'I invoke Tishtrya
, the bright and glorious star,
in the shape of a golden-horned bull
.

67. A Genius defined, 'Genius of the good eye,' by opposition to
'the bad eye.' Saoka (Sôk) is an auxiliary to Mithra (Mihr);
she receives first, from above, all the good destined to man,
and transmits it to the lower sky or firmament. (which is the
seat of Destiny) through the moon and Ardvisur (Gr. Bund.)

68. See
Yt13
.

69. The Genius of Victory (Warharan). See
Yt14
.

70. The hvareno (Khurra or Farr) or light of sovereignty. See verse 39
and see
Yt19
.

71. Tishtrya (Tir), the star of rain. See
Yt8
.

72. Tishtrya appears successively under three forms, during the month
named from him (the first month of summer, 21 June-21 July):
ten days as a man, ten days as a bull, ten days as a horse. 'As
a bull he is most to be invoked' (Comm.), to prepare his final
victory over the demon of Drought, Apaosha.

38. 'I invoke the holy, beneficent Gathas
,
who rule over the Ratus
:

'I invoke the Ahunavaiti Gatha;

'I invoke the Ustavaiti Gatha;

'I invoke the Spentamainyush Gatha;

'I invoke the Vohukhshathra Gatha;

'I invoke the Vahishtoishti Gatha.

73. The
five collections of hymns

which form the oldest and holiest part of the

Yasna
and of the
Avesta

(
Yasna 28-34
;

Yasna 43-46
;

Yasna 47-50
;

Yasna 51
;

Yasna 53
);
they are named after their initial words.

74. The chiefs of creation; 'they rule over the Ratus inasmuch as
it is by their means that these other Ratus are invoked' (Comm.)

39. 'I invoke the Karshvares of Arzahe and Savahe;

'I invoke the Karshvares of Fradadhafshu and Vidadhafshu;

'I invoke the Karshvares of Vourubaresti and Vouruzaresti;

'I invoke the bright Hvaniratha
;

'I invoke the bright, glorious Haetumant
;

'I invoke the good Ashi
;

['I invoke the good Chisti
;]

'I invoke the most pure Chista
;

'I invoke the Glory of the Aryan regions
;

'I invoke the Glory of the bright Yima, the good shepherd
.

75. The earth is divided into seven Karshwars
[(Pah.) (Arezahi, Sawahi, Fradadhafshu, Widadhafshu, Wouru-bareshti,
Wourujareshti, and Xwaniratha)], of which the central one, Xwaniratha,
is the finest and contains Iran.

76. See
Vd1.14
.

77. Ashi (Ashishvang), the Genius that imparts riches to the righteous:
see
Yt17
.

78. An angel of religious knowledge.

79. Religious knowledge: invoked with Daena (Religion;

Siroza, 24
)

80. The light of sovereignty, khwarrah (Phl.) (Av. 'khwarenah') , which
if secured by the Aryans makes them rule over their enemies
(see verse 37 and
Yt19.56-93
).

81. See
Vd2.2
.

40. 'Let him be worshipped with sacrifice,
let him be gladdened, gratified, and satisfied, the
holy Sraosha, the well-formed, victorious, holy
Sraosha
.

'Bring libations unto the Fire, bring hard wood
unto the Fire, bring incense of Vohu-gaona unto
the Fire.

'Offer up the sacrifice to the Vazishta fire
, which smites
the fiend Spenjaghra
: bring unto it the
cooked meat and full overflowing libations
.

82. That he may smite Aeshma and the other fiends.

83. The fire of lightning.

84. The demon that prevents the fall of rain; a companion in arms
of Apaosha.

85. Doubtful.

41. 'Offer up the sacrifice to the holy
Sraosha, that the holy Sraosha may smite down
the fiend Kunda
, who is drunken without drinking
,
and throws down into the Hell of the Druj the
wicked Daeva-worshippers, who live in sin.

86. The same as Kundi; see
Vd11.9
.

87. Whereas Aeshma, the other arch-enemy of Sraosha, borrows part
of his strength from drunkenness (
Yasna 10.8
).

[42.
'I invoke the Kara fish

, who lives beneath
waters in the bottom of the deep lakes.

'I invoke the ancient and sovereign Merezu
, the
most warlike of the creatures of the two Spirits
.

'I invoke the seven bright Sru
...']

88. From the
Vendidad Sada
. The clause may have belonged to
the original text; it is preceded by another clause which certainly
did not belong to it, and part of which is cited in the commentary
ad Farg. VIII, 103, where it would have been more suitably placed:
'When he has been cleansed in the next inhabited place, he may
then sow and till the pasture fields, as food for the sheep and as
food for the ox.'

89. The Kar-mâhî, the Ratu or chief of the creatures that live in
water. See
Vd20.4
, note;

Yt14.29
.

90. A
apox lecomenon
. From its two epithets, 'ancient'
and 'sovereign,' it appears that it must designate one of the first principles,
that is to say, some form of Heaven, Light, Space, or Time.

91. Doubtful.

92. Hapta sravô bâmya....
[Wolff: "ich rufe herab die strahlenden sieben Hörner [Srû's] [Ebenfalls ein Sternbild?]
—ihre Kinder ... [pusa-?] werden [?]"
(I call down the radiating seven horns (Sru)...(also a constellation?)—their children
... [pusa-? perhaps 'flock'] become (?))]

VI.

43. 'They cried about, their minds wavered to
and fro
, Angra Mainyu the deadly, the Daeva of
the Daevas; Indra the Daeva, Sauru the Daeva,
Naunghaithya the Daeva, Taurvi and Zairi
;
Aeshma of the murderous spear
; Akatasha the
Daeva
; Winter, made by the Daevas; the deceiving,
unseen Death; Zaurva
, baneful to the
fathers; Buiti the Daeva
; Driwi
the Daeva;
Daiwi
the Daeva; Kasvi
the Daeva;
Paitisha
the most Daeva-like amongst the Daevas.]

93. Up and down, in hope and despair.

94. See
Vd10.9-10
.

95. See
Vd10.13
.

96.
Vd10.13
.

97. Old age.

98. See above, verse 1 and note 3.

99. Malice; see above,
Vd2.29
.

100. Lying; see above,
Vd2.29
.

101. Spite; see above,
Vd2.29
.

102. Opposition, or counter-action, the same as Paityâra; a personification
of the doings of Ahriman and of his marring power.

44. 'And the evil-doing Daeva, Angra
Mainyu, the deadly, said: "'What! let the wicked,
evil-doing Daevas gather together at the head of
Arezura
!"

103. At the gate of hell; see above,
Vd3.7 and note.

45. 'They rush away shouting, the wicked,
evil-doing Daevas; they run away shouting, the
wicked, evil-doing Daevas; they run away casting
the Evil Eye, the wicked, evil-doing Daevas: "Let
us gather together at the head of Arezura!

46. '"For he is just born the holy Zarathushtra,
in the house of Pourushaspa. How can we
procure his death? He is the weapon that fells the
fiends: he is a counter-fiend to the fiends; he is
a Druj to the Druj. Vanished are the Daeva-worshippers,
the Nasu made by the Daeva, the
false-speaking Lie!"

47. 'They rush away shouting, the wicked,
evil-doing Daevas, into the depths of the dark,
raging world of hell.

'Ashem vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.'

vd19sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 20
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd20sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd20sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 20.

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Apr 15, 2023.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

It has already been seen (
Farg. VII, 44
)
that there are three kinds of medicine one that heals with the knife, one that heals
with herbs, and one that heals with sacred spells. The present
Fargard deals with the origin of medicine, particularly the herbs-medicine.
Its inventor was Thrita, of the Sâma family, to whom Ahura Mazda
brought down from heaven ten thousand healing

plants that had been growing up around the tree of eternal life,
the white Hom or Gaokerena (§ 4).

Notes:

This Thrita is mentioned only once again in the
Avesta
,
in
Yasna 9.7
,
where he appears to have been one of the first priests
of Haoma. This accounts for his medical skill; as Haoma is the
plant of eternal life, it is but natural that one of his first
priests should have been the first healer.

This Fargard has only an allusion to the origin of the knife-medicine [surgery],
which was, as it seems, revealed by Khshathra Vairya (§ 3). The
last paragraphs (§§ 5-12) deal with the spell-medicine.

The functions ascribed here to Thrita were sometimes conferred
on his semi-namesake Thraetaona [Faridoon] (see
Westergaard Fragments
, II).
Hamza makes Thraetaona the inventor of medicine (Ed Gottwaldt, p. 23;
cf. Mirkhond,
Early Kings of Persia
, tr. by Shea, p. 152);
the Tavîds (formulas of exorcism) against sickness are inscribed
with his name, and we find in the
Avesta
itself his Fravashi invoked
'against itch, hot fever, humours, cold fever (
Vd7.58
),
incontinence, against the plagues created by the serpent
(
Yt13.131
).'
We see from the last words of this passage that disease was understood as coming
from the serpent; in other words, that it was considered a sort
of poisoning
, and this is the reason why the killer of the serpent
(Azi-Dahaka) [Zohak] was invoked to act against it.

1. This theory, which modern science would not utterly reject, accounts
for the great part which the serpent plays in the worship of Asclepius;
as sickness comes from him, from him too must or
may come the healing.

FARGARD 20. Thrita, the first healer.

1. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most
beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!
Who was he who first of the healers
, of the wise, the happy, the
wealthy, the glorious, the strong, the Paradhatas
, drove back
sickness to sickness, drove back death to death
; and first
turned away the point of the sword and the fire of fever from the
bodies of mortals?'

2. Those who knew how to take care or their own bodies,
like Isfandyar: some say that no sword could wound him' (Comm.)

3. The Paradhata or Peshdad, the kings of the first Iranian dynasty.

4. That is to say, who kept sickness in bonds, who kept death in
bonds' (Comm.)

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Thrita it was who first of the
healers, of the wise, the happy, the wealthy, the glorious, the
strong, the Paradhatas, drove back sickness to sickness, drove
back death to death, and first turned away the point of the sword
and the fire of fever from the bodies of mortals.

3. 'He asked for a source of remedies; he obtained it from
Khshathra-Vairya
, to withstand sickness and to withstand death;
to withstand pain and to withstand fever; to withstand Sarana and
to withstand Sarastya
; to withstand Azana and to withstand
Azahva; to withstand Kurugha and. to withstand Azivaka; to
withstand Duruka and to 'withstand Astairya; to withstand the
evil eye, rottenness, and infection which Angra Mainyu had
created against the bodies of mortals.

5. As Khshathra-Vairya presides over metals, it was a knife he received,
'of which the point and the base were set in gold.' He was therefore
the first who healed with the knife, as well as the first who
healed with herbs. As for the healing with the holy word, see §
5 and seq.

6. Headache and cold fever.

4. 'And I Ahura Mazda brought down the healing plants that, by
many hundreds, by many thousands, by many myriads, grow up all
around the one Gaokerena
.

7. There are two Haomas: one is the yellow or golden Haoma,
which is the earthly Haoma, and which, when prepared for the sacrifice,
is the king of healing plants; the other is the white Haoma or
Gaokerena, which grows up in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha,
where it is surrounded by the ten thousand healing
plants, created by Ohrmazd in order to oppose so many diseases
that had been created by Ahriman
(
Bundahishn
;
see
Vd22.2
). A frog goes swimming
around the Gaokerena to gnaw it down: but two Kar Mahi
(
Vd19.42
) keep watch and circle around
the tree, so that the head of one of them is continually towards
the frog (
Bund.
).

5. 'All this do we achieve; all this do we order; all these
prayers do we utter, for the benefit of the bodies of mortals
;

8. We do all that is necessary for healing; we give, as Dastobar
(Dastur), the necessary prescriptions; we recite the needed prayers.
-- This section is a transition to the spell-medicine.

6. 'To withstand sickness and to withstand death; to withstand
pain and to withstand fever; to withstand Sarana and to withstand
Sarastya; to withstand Azana and to withstand Azahva; to
withstand Kurugha and to withstand Azivaka; to withstand Duruka
and to withstand Astairya; to withstand the evil eye, rottenness,
and infection which Angra Mainyu has created against the bodies
of mortals.

7. 'To thee, O Sickness, I say avaunt! to thee, O Death, I say
avaunt! to thee, O Pain, I say avaunt! to thee, O Fever, I say
avaunt! to thee, O Evil Eye, I say avaunt! to thee, O Sarana, I
say avaunt! and to thee, O Sarastya, I say avaunt! to thee, O
Azana, I say avaunt! and to thee, O Azahva, I say avaunt! to
thee, O Kurugha, I say avaunt! and to thee, O Azivaka, I say
avaunt! to thee, O Duruka, I say avaunt! and to thee, O Astairya,
I say avaunt!

8. 'Give us, O Ahura, that powerful sovereignty, by the
strength of which we may smite down the Druj! By its might may
we smite the Druj
!

9. This clause is borrowed, with some alteration, from

Yasna 31.4
;
the original text is, 'May that strong power come to
me, by the might of which we may smite down the Druj!'

9. 'I drive away Ishire and I drive away Aghuire; I drive away
Aghra and I drive away Ughra; I drive away sickness and I drive
away death; I drive away pain and I drive away fever; I drive
away Sarana and I drive away Sarastya; I drive away Azana and I
drive away Azahva; I drive away Kurugha and I drive away Azivaka;
I drive away Duruka and I drive away Astairya; I drive away the
evil eye, rottenness, and infection which Angra Mainyu has
created against the bodies of mortals.

10. 'I drive away all manner of sickness and death, all the
Yatus and Pairikas
, and all the wicked Jainis
.

10. See
Vd11.9
.

11. [i.e. genie, jinn, djinn -JHP] 'Jai' (Comm.), that is Jahi;
cf.
Vd18.62
, and

Vd22.2, note
.
-- Clause 10 is imitated from clause 12.

11. '
A Airyema ishyo
.
May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman
come
here, for the men and women of Zarathushtra to rejoice, for
Vohu-mano to rejoice; with the desirable reward that Religion
deserves. I solicit for holiness that boon that is vouchsafed by
Ahura!

12. On Airyaman, see
Vd22
. Clauses 15-12 are borrowed from

Yasna 54.1
, and form
the prayer known as
Airyema ishyo
.

12. 'May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman smite all manner of
sickness and death, all the Yatus and Pairikas, and all the
wicked Jainis.'

[13. Yatha ahu vairyo:- The will of the Lord is the law of
righteousness.
The gifts of Vohu-mano to the deeds done in this world for
Mazda. He who relieves the poor makes Ahura king.

Kem-na mazda
:- What protector hast thou given unto me, O
Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me? Whom but thy
Atar and Vohu-mano, through whose work I keep on the world of
Righteousness? Reveal therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule!

Ke verethrem-ja:- Who is the victorious who will protect thy
teaching? Make it clear that I am the guide for both worlds.
May Sraosha come with Vohu-mano and help whomsoever thou
pleasest, O Mazda!

Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world
of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away to the regions of
the north, never more to give unto death the living world of
Righteousness
!]

13. See
Vd8.19-20
.

vd20sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 21
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd21sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd21sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 21. Healing spells

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 7, 2001.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

I (1). Praise of the holy bull.

II (2-3). Invocation addressed to rain as a healing power.

III a (4-7). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and to the
light of the sun.

III b (8-11). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and to
the light of the moon.

III c (12-17). Joint invocation addressed to the waters and to
the light of the stars.

IV (18-21), Spells against disease.

The largest part of this Fargard is filled with a uniform spell,
intended, as it seems, for the protection of lying-in women (§§
6-7, 10-11, 14-15), who are under the special care of Ardvi Sura
Anahita, the great goddess of the waters. That spell is repeated
three times, in a joint invocation to the sun, to the moon, and
to the stars respectively; that strange association is perhaps
owing to the fact that both the light and the waters spring up
from the Hara Berezaiti and return there (see § 4, note 1).

FARGARD 21.

I.

Notes:

1. Hail, bounteous bull
! Hail to thee, beneficent bull! Hail
to thee, who makest increase! Hail to thee, who makest growth!
Hail to thee, who dost bestow his part
upon the righteous
faithful, and wilt bestow it on the faithful yet unborn! Hail to
thee, whom the Jahi kills
, and the ungodly Ashemaogha, and the
wicked tyrant
.

1. The primeval bull who was created by Ohrmazd and killed by
Ahriman with the help of the Jahi. -- Clause 1 is to be recited when
one meets an ox or any kind of cattle,
Gr. Riv.
386.

2. Possibly, 'who dost kill the Jahi (by means of gomez).

3. His daily food.

4. The wicked kills animals, out of mere cruelty, beyond his needs
(
Yasna 29.1
;

Y32.12, 14
;

Y48.7
).

II.

2. 'Come, come on, O clouds, from up above, down on the earth,
by thousands of drops, by myriads of drops:' thus say, O holy
Zarathushtra! 'to destroy sickness, to destroy death, to destroy
the sickness that kills
, to destroy death that kills, to destroy
Gadha and Apagadha
.

5. Cf.
Bund. 3.3, 6, 4
.

6. Names of diseases.

3. 'If death come after noon, may healing come at eve!

'If death come at eve, may healing come at night!

'If death come at night, may healing come at dawn!

'And showers shower down new water, new earth, new plants,
new healing powers, and new healing.

IIIa.

4. 'As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering place of the
waters
, rising up and going down, up the aerial way and down the
earth, down the earth and up the aerial way
: thus rise up and
roll along! thou in whose rising and growing Ahura Mazda made the
aerial way.

7. Waters and light are believed to flow from the same spring and
in the same bed: 'As the light comes in through Alburz (Hara Berezaiti)
and goes out through Alburz, so water also comes out through
Alburz and goes away through Alburz'
(
Bund. 20.4
). Every day
the sun, moon, and stars rise up from Alburz, and every day all
the waters on the earth come back together to the sea Vouru-kasha,
and there collected come down again to the earth from the peaks
of Alburz (
Gr. Riv.
43'). As light comes from three different
sources (the sun, the moon, and the stars), the waters are invoked
three times, first in company with the sun, then with the moon,
lastly with the stars, as if there should be three different movements
of the rain connected with the three movements or light.

8. Waters come down from the sky to the earth and rise back from
the earth to the sky (see
Vd5.15 seq.
)

5. 'Up! rise up and roll along! thou swift-horsed Sun, above
Hara Berezaiti, and produce light for the world (and mayst thou
[O man!] rise up there, if thou art to abide in Garo-nmanem
)
,
along the path made by Mazda, along the way made by the gods, the
watery way they opened.

9. 'If thou art a righteous man' (Comm.)

10. The translation of this clause is doubtful.

6. 'And the Holy Word [manthra spenta] shall keep away the evil
: Of thee [O
child!] I will cleanse the birth and growth; of thee [O woman!] I
will make the body and the strength pure; I make thee rich in
children and rich in milk;

11. The spell refers to the cleansing and generative power of the
waters; cf. the invocation to Ardvi Sura,
Vd7.16
: the
waters are supposed to make females fertile as they make the earth.
This spell was probably pronounced to facilitate childbirth.

7. 'Rich in seed, in milk
, in fat, in marrow, and in
offspring. I shall bring to thee a thousand pure springs,
running towards the pastures that give food to the child.

12. There are, in the text, two words for 'milk,' the one referring
to the milk of women, the other to the milk of cows.

IIIb.

8. 'As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering place of the
waters, rising up and going down, up the aerial way and down the
earth, down the earth and up the aerial way:

'Thus rise up and roll along! thou in whose rising and
growing Ahura Mazda made the earth.

9. 'Up! rise up, thou Moon, that dost keep in thee the seed of
the bull
;

'Rise up above Hara Berezaiti, and produce light for the
world (and mayst thou [O man!] rise up there, if thou art to
abide in Garo-nmanem), along the path made by Mazda, along the
way made by the gods, the watery way they opened.

13. When the primeval bull died, 'what was bright and strong in
his seed was brought to the sphere of the moon, and when it was
cleansed there in the light of the astre, two creatures were shaped
with it, a male and a female, from which came two hundred and
seventy-two kinds of animals'
(
Bund.
,

Bund.
).

10. 'And the Holy Word [manthra spenta] shall keep away the evil: Of thee [O
child!] I will cleanse the birth and growth; of thee [O woman!] I
will make the body and the strength pure; I make thee rich in
children and rich in milk;

11. 'Rich in seed, in milk, in fat, in marrow, and in offspring.
I shall bring to thee a thousand pure springs, running towards
the pastures that give food to the child.

IIIc.

12. 'As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering place of the
waters, rising up and going down, up the aerial way and down the
earth, down the earth and up the aerial way:

'Thus rise up and roll along! thou in whose rising and
growing Ahura Mazda made everything that grows
.

14. The plants that grow under the action of 'those stars that have
in them the seed of waters ' (cf. § 13).

13. 'Up! rise up, ye deep Stars, that have in you the seed of
waters
;

'Rise up above Hara Berezaiti and produce light for the
world (and mayst thou [O man!] rise up there, if thou art to
abide in Gara-nmanem), along the path made by Mazda. along the
way made by the gods, the watery way they opened.

15. See
Yt12.29
.

14. 'And the Holy Word [manthra spenta] shall keep away the evil: Of thee [O
child!] I will cleanse the birth and growth; of thee [O woman!] I
will make the body and the strength pure; I make thee rich in
children and rich in milk;

15. 'Rich in seed, in milk, in fat, in marrow, and in offspring.
I shall bring to thee a thousand pure springs, running towards
the pastures that will give food to the child.

16. 'As the sea Vouru-kasha is the gathering place of the
waters, rising up and going down, up the aerial way and down the
earth, down the earth and up the aerial way:

'Thus rise up and roll along! ye in whose rising and growing
Ahura Mazda made everything that rises.

17. 'In your rising away will the Kahvuzi
fly and cry, away
will the Ayehi
fly and cry, away will the Jahi who follows the
Yatu, fly and cry.

16. 'He who diminishes glory, Ahriman' (Comm.)

17. 'Sterility, Ahriman' (Comm.)

IV.

. 'I drive away Ishire and I drive away Aghuire; I drive away
Aghra and I drive away Ughra; I drive away sickness and I drive
away death; I drive away pain and I drive away fever; I drive
away Sarana and I drive away Sarastya. I drive away Azana and I
drive away Azahva; I drive away Kurugha and I drive away
Azhivaka; l drive away Duruka and I drive away Astairya; I drive
away the evil eye, rottenness, and infection which Angra Mainyu
has created against the bodies of mortals.

18. §§ 18-23 =
Vd20.9-13
.

19. 'I drive away all manner of sickness and death, all the
Yatus and Pairikas, and all the wicked Jainis.

20. '
A Airyema ishyo
:-
May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman come
here, for the men and women of Zarathushtra to rejoice, for
Vohu-mano to rejoice; with the desirable reward that Religion
deserves. I solicit for holiness that boon that is vouchsafed by
Ahura!

21. 'May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman smite all manner of
sickness and death, all the Yatus and Pairikas, and all the
wicked Jainis.

22. '
Yatha ahu vairyo
:-
The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness!

'
Kem-na mazda
:-
What protector hast thou given unto me ... ?

'Ke verethrem-ja:- Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching ... ?

23. 'Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta!
Perish, O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish,
O world of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away to the
regions of the north, never more to give unto death the living
world of Righteousness!]

vd21sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vendidad Fargard 22
Source: https://www.avesta.org/vendidad/vd22sbe.htm
================================================================================

vd22sbe

Glossary

Vendidad

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 7, 2001.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

It has already been seen that of all healers, the most powerful
is the one who treats with the Holy Word (Manthra Spenta), that
is with sacred spells (
Vd7.44
):
Of all sacred spells, the most efficacious is the

Airyema ishyo
, which forms the fifty-fourth
Ha of the
Yasna
. This is expressed under a mythological form
in the following Fargard (cf.
Westergaard's Fragments
, IV).

Angra Mainyu having created 99,999 diseases, Ahura applies for
remedy to the Holy Word (Manthra Spenta; §§ 1-5). -- How
shall I manage? asks Manthra Spenta (§ 16). Ahura sends his messenger
to Airyaman with the same request.

This Fargard is unfinished or, more correctly, the end of it is
understood. Airyaman comes at once to Ahura's call, and digs nine
furrows. It is no doubt in order to perform the
Barashnom
,
by the virtue of which the strength of the demon and of the demon's
work will be broken. The Fargard ends therefore with spells against
sickness and agailist death, added to the usual spells of the
ordinary Barashnom.

FARGARD 22. Angra Mainyu creates 99,999 diseases; Ahura Mazda counters with the
Holy Manthra and with Airyaman

I.

Notes:

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'I,
Ahura Mazda, the Maker of all good things, when I made this
mansion
, the beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I go
up, there may I arrive!)

1. 'The Garothman' (Comm.), Paradise.

2. 'Then the ruffian looked at me
; the ruffian Angra Mainyu,
the deadly, wrought against me nine diseases, and ninety, and
nine hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thousand
diseases. So mayst thou heal me, thou most glorious Manthra
Spenta!

2. And cast on me the evil eye; 'it was by casting the evil eye
on the good creatures of Ohrmazd that Ahriman corrupted them' (Eznig,

Refutatio Haeresiarum
II). See
Vd20.3
.

3. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
swift-running steeds; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka
,
made by Mazda and holy.

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
high-humped camels; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy.

3. The Genius of the good eye; see
Vd19.37, and note
.

4. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand brown oxen that
do not push; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by
Mazda and holy.

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand females big with
young, of all species of small cattle; I offer thee up a
sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy.

5. 'And I will bless thee with the fair blessing-spell of the
righteous, the friendly blessing-spell of the righteous, that
makes the empty swell to fulness and the full to overflowing,
that comes to help him who was sickening, and makes the sick man
sound again.

6. 'Manthra Spenta, the all-glorious, replied unto me: "How
shall I heal thee? How shall I drive away from thee those nine
diseases, and those ninety, those nine hundred, those nine
thousand, and those nine times ten thousand diseases?"'

II.

7. The Maker Ahura Mazda called for
Nairyo-sangha
: Go thou, Nairyo-sangha, the herald, and drive
towards the mansion of Airyaman, and speak thus unto him:

4. The messenger of Ahura Mazda. He is a form of Atar, the
Fire (
Yasna 17.11
).

8. Thus speaks Ahura Mazda, the Holy One, unto thee:

'I, Ahura Mazda, the Maker of all good things, when I made
this mansion, the beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I
ascend, there may I arrive!)

9. 'Then the ruffian looked at me; the ruffian Angra Mainyu,
the deadly, wrought against me nine diseases, and ninety, and
nine hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thousand
diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O Airyaman, the vow-fulfiller!

10. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
swift-running steeds; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy,

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
high-humped camels; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy,

11. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand brown oxen that
do not push; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by
Mazda and holy.

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand females big with
young, of all species of small cattle. I offer thee up a
sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy.

12. 'And I will bless thee with the fair blessing-spell of the
righteous, the friendly blessing-spell of the righteous, that
make, the empty swell to fulness and the full to overflowing,
that comes to help him who was sickening, and makes the sick man
sound again.'

III.

13. In obedience to Ahura's words he went, Nairyo-sangha, the
herald; he drove towards the mansion of Airyaman, he spake unto
Airyaman, saying:

14. Thus speaks Ahura Mazda, the Holy One, unto thee: 'I, Ahura
Mazda, the Maker of all good things, when I made this mansion,
the beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I go up, there
may I arrive!)

15. 'Then the ruffian looked at me; the ruffian Angra Mainyu,
the deadly, wrought against me nine diseases, and ninety, and
nine hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thousand
diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O Airyaman, the vow-fulfiller!

16. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
swift-running steeds ; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy.

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
high-humped camels; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy.

17. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand brown oxen that
do not push; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by
Mazda and holy.

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand females, big
with young, of all species of small cattle; I offer thee up a
sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy.

18. 'And I will bless thee with the fair blessing-spell of the
righteous, the friendly blessing-spell of the righteous, that
makes the empty swell to fulness and the full to overflowing,
that comes to help him who was sickening, and makes the sick man
sound again.'

IV.

19. Quickly was it done, nor was it long, eagerly set off the
vow-fulfilling Airyaman, towards the mountain of the holy
Questions
, towards the forest of the holy Questions.

5. The mountain where 'the holy conversations' between Ohrmazd
and Zarathushtra took place (cf.
Vd19.11
).

20. Nine kinds of stallions brought he with him, the
vow-fulfilling Airyaman
.

Nine kinds of camels brought he with him, the vow-fulfilling
Airyaman.

Nine kinds of bulls brought he with him, the vow-fulfilling
Airyaman.

Nine kinds of small cattle brought he with him, the
vow-fulfilling Airyaman.

He brought with him the nine twigs
; he drew along nine
furrows
.

6. According to Framji, 'He brought with him the strength
of nine stallions,' to infuse it into the sick man
(cf.
Yasht 8.24
).

7. That is to say, 'the nine-knotted stick' (Framji; cf.

Vd9.14
).

8. To perform the Barashnom, 'the great service of the Nirang Din,
through which all evil, moral and natural, including evil passions,
disease, and death will be removed' (Wilson,
The Parsi Religion
,
p. 341).

8. 'I drive away Ishire and I drive away Aghuire; I drive away
Aghra and I drive away Ughra; I drive away sickness and I drive
away death; I drive away pain and I drive away fever; I drive
away Sarana and I drive away Sarastya; I drive away Azhana and I
drive away Azhahva; I drive away Kurugha and I drive away
Azhivaka; I drive away Duruka and I drive away Astairya. I drive
away the evil eye, rottenness, and infection which Angra Mainyu
has created against the bodies of mortals.

9. From the
Vendidad Sada
; as
Vd20.9-13
.

22. 'I drive away all manner of sickness and death, all the
Yatus and Pairikas, and all the wicked Jainis.

23. '
A Airyema Ishyo
:-
May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman come here, for the men and
women of Zarathushtra to rejoice, for Vohu-mano to rejoice; with
the desirable reward that Religion deserves. I solicit for
holiness that boon that is vouchsafed by Ahura.

24. 'May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman smite all manner of
sickness and death, all the Yatus and Pairikas, and all the
wicked Jainis.

25. '
Yatha ahu vairyo
:-
The will of the Lord is the law of
righteousness. The gifts of Vohu-mano to the deeds done in this
world for Mazda. He who relieves the poor makes Ahura king.

'
Kem-na mazda
:-
What protector hast thou given unto me O
Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me? Whom but
thy Atar and Vohu-mano, through whose work I keep on the world of
righteousness? Reveal therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule!

'Ke verethrem-ja:- Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching? Make it clear that I am the guide for both worlds.
May Sraosha come with Vohu-mano and help whomsoever thou
pleasest, O Mazda!

'Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world
of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away to the regions of
the north, never more to give unto death the living world of
Righteousness!']

[end of the
Vendidad
]

vd22sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Khorda Avesta - Part 1
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/ka_part1.htm
================================================================================

ka_part1

Glossary

AVESTA: KHORDA AVESTA (Book of Common Prayer)

PART 1: Frequently used short prayers:

Ashem Vohu (invocation of Asha)

[
MP3 Audio
]

ashem vohû vahishtem astî

ushtâ astî ushtâ ahmâi

hyat ashâi vahishtâi ashem.

Holiness (Asha) is the best of all good:

it is also happiness.

Happy the man who is holy with perfect holiness!

NOTES:

1. Based on edition of Karl F. Geldner,
Avesta, the Sacred
Books of the Parsis,
Stuttgart, 1896.

2. Recited by Soli Dastur. Copyright 2006. Used with permission.

3. Translated by James Darmesteter (From
Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898., Vol 3, p 216.)

Ahunwar (most sacred manthra of Zoroastrianism)

[
MP3 Audio
]

ýathâ ahû vairyô

athâ ratush ashâtcît hacâ

vanghêush dazdâ mananghô

shyaothananãm anghêush mazdâi

xshathremcâ ahurâi â

ýim drigubyô dadat vâstârem!!

The will of the Lord is the law of righteousness.

The gifts of Vohu-mano to the deeds done in this world for Mazda.

He who relieves the poor makes Ahura king.

4. Recited by Soli Dastur. Copyright 2006. Used with permission.

5. This is the most holy prayer in the Zoroastrian religion.
Translations vary widely. This translation is by James Darmesteter
(From
, American Edition, 1898.,
Vol 3, p 100.)

Compare with the Pahlavi explanation (PRDd60, tr. AV. Williams):

The explanation of
yathâ ahû vairyô
:
'as is the will of the Lord' (as is the will of Ohrmazd)
'so (is) that of the ratus' (and so is that of the priest)
'through whatever righteousness' (good deeds are to be done,
so in priestly fashion to be done; just as Ohrmazd (wills),
one must increase (them)).
'That which the gift of Vohuman too (is) within the action of Ohrmazd'
(i.e. that reward and recompense which they give to Vohuman [1] they
thus give to him [i.e. Ohrmazd] also; there is one who says thus:
'Vohuman gives himself'). 'Lordship is *given to Ohrmazd by him' [2]
(and he makes Ohrmazd Lord and ruler over his body), 'who gives good
things to the poor' (and nurture, in that they provide assistance and
intercession for them. There is one who says thus: 'Lordship is from
Ohrmazd', i.e. the rulership is given him by Ohrmazd. There is one who
says thus: 'The Lordship of Ohrmazd is put into practice'.)

[NOTES:

[1] The gloss
kû ân mizd ud pâdâshn ...

etc., in PRDd., Pahl. Vd., and KZA appears to represent a
substantial misunderstanding of the Avestan; D. compares
this with the Pahl. gloss of Y31.21 and notes that neither
has
ô
or
pad
before wahman (ZKA, transl., p. 3, nn.6, 7).

[2] Cf. Dk. IX.21, DkM. 934.14 f.:
frâz-ish ân guft
ahlaw zardusht kû-sh yazishn kard kê ân î
amâ yashtan humenishnî az ish ud ên-iz kû
dên pad tan mehmân â-sh wahman ud mânsar
pad tan mehmân: "Righteous Zartosht proclaimed that
worship was done by him from whom there is the good thinking of
our worship. And this also that he in whose body Religion is lodged,
then Vohuman and the sacred word [[manthra]] are lodged in his body".

Kem Na Mazda (exorcism)

[
MP3 Audio
]

kêm-nâ mazdâ mavaitê pâyûm
dadå hyat mâ dregvå dîdareshatâ
aênanghê anyêm thwahmât âthrascâ
mananghascâ ýayå shyaothanâish ashem
thraoshtâ ahurâ tãm môi dãstvãm
daênayâi frâvaocâ,

kê verethrem-jâ thwâ pôi sêñghâ
ýôi heñtî cithrâ môi dãm
ahûmbish ratûm cizhdî at hôi vohû
seraoshô jañtû mananghâ mazdâ ahmâi
ýahmâi vashî kahmâicît.

pâta-nô tbishyañtat pairi mazdåsca
ârmaitishca speñtasca, nase daêvî druxsh
nase daêvô-cithre nase daêvô-frakarshte
nase daêvô-fradâiti, apa druxsh nase apa druxsh
dvâra apa druxsh vînase apâxedhre apa-nasyehe
mâ mereñcainîsh gaêthå astvaitîsh
ashahe, nemascâ ýâ ârmaitish îzhâcâ.
ashem vohû....

Kem-na Mazda (Exorcism)

What protector hast thou given unto me, O Mazda! while the
hate of the wicked encompasses me? Whom but thy Atar and Vohu-mano,
through whose work I keep on the world of righteousness? Reveal
therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule!

Ke verethrem-ja:

Who is the victorious who will protect thy teaching? Make
it clear that I am the guide for both worlds. May Sraosha come
with Vohu-mano and help whomsoever thou pleasest, O Mazda!

Pata-no:

Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O creation
of the fiend! Perish, O world of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj!
Rush away, O Druj! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away to the regions
of the north, never more to give unto death the living world of
Righteousness!"

Homage, with which (are combined) devotion and milk offerings.

Padyab-Kusti (ablution and formula for tying the kusti)

Avestan (and Pazand)

0. xshnaothrâ ahurahe mazdå,

ashem vohû....

kêm-nâ mazdâ ...

(hôrmezd i hvadâe (3)
, âharman
awâdishâhã dûr awâzh dâshtâr
zat shkasta bât. âharman dêwã drûzhã
jâdvã darvañdã kîkã karafã
sâstârã gunâhkârã âshmôgã
darvañdã dushmanã faryã zat shkasta
bât. dushpâdishâhã awâdishâhã
bât, dushmanã stuh bât, dushmanã awâdishâhã
bât.

hôrmezd i hvadâe, ezh hamâ gunâh patit
pashêmãnôm, ezh haravistîn dushmat duzhûxt
duzhvaresht men pa gêthî minît vaem guft vaem
kard vaem jast vaem bun bût estet ezh ã gunâhihâ
manishnî gaweshnî kunishnî tanî rvãnî
gêthî mainyuãnî ôxe awaxsh pashêmã
pa se gaweshnî pa patit hôm!)

1. xshnaothrâ ahurahe mazdå tarôidîti
angrahe mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomi ashem,

ashem vohû....

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ashem vohû....

2. jasa-mê avanghe mazda (3).

mazdayasnô ahmî mazdayasnô zarathushtrish fravarânê
âstûtascâ fravaretascâ, âstuyê
humatem manô âstuyê hûxtem vacô
âstuyê hvarshtem shyaothanem. âstuyê daênãm
[vanguhîm] mâzdayasnîm fraspâyaoxedhrãm
nidhâsnaithishem hvaêtvadathãm ashaonîm
ýâ hâitinãmcâ bûshyeiñtinãmcâ
mazishtâcâ vahishtâcâ sraêshtâcâ
ýâ âhûirish zarathushtrish, ahurâi
mazdâi vîspâ vohû cinahmî. aêshâ
astî daênayå mâzdayasnôish âstûitish!!

ashem vohû...!!

0. With satisfaction for Ahura Mazda. Ashem Vohu....

What protector hast thou given ...

Ohrmazd is Lord! Ahriman he keeps at bay, he holds him back.
May Ahriman be struck and defeated, with devs and drujs, sorcerers
and sinners, kayags and karbs, tyrants, wrongdoers and heretics,
sinners, enemies and witches! May they (all) be struck and defeated!
May evil rulers not exist, (or) be far away! May enemies be defeated!
May enemies all not exist, (or) be far away!

O Ohrmazd, Lord! I am contrite for all sins and I desist from
them, from all bad thoughts, bad words and bad acts which I have
thought, spoken or done in the world, or which have happened through
me, or have originated with me. For those sins of thinking, speaking
and acting, of body and soul, worldly or spiritual, O Ohrmazd!
I am contrite, I renounce them. With three words I distance myself
(from them).

1. With satisfaction for Ahura Mazda, scorn for Angra Mainyu!
The true achievement of what is most wonderful, according to wish!

I praise Asha!

Ashem Vohu....

Yatha Ahu Vairyo...(2).

Ashem Vohu....

2. Come to my aid, O Mazda (3).

I profess myself a Mazda-worshipper, a Zoroastrian, having
vowed it and professed it. I pledge myself to the well-thought
thought, I pledge myself to the well-spoken word, I pledge myself
to the well-done action.

I pledge myself to the Mazdayasnian religion, which causes
the attack to be put off and weapons put down; which upholds khvaetvadatha
(kin-marriage), which possesses Asha; which of all religions that
exist or shall be, is the greatest, the best, and the most beautiful:
Ahuric, Zoroastrian. I ascribe all good to Ahura Mazda. This is
the creed of the Mazdayasnian religion.

Ashem Vohu...!!

NOTES:

4. For the complete ritual see
the kusti ritual
.

5. As above.

6. Geldner indicates that this should be repeated three times.
He gives no footnotes to indicate that any of his manuscripts
differ here, but most other sources omit the 3.

Baj before meals

Pazand/Avestan

ba nãm i ýazad i baxshâyañdeh i baxshâyashgar
i meherbãn. hôrmezd i hvadâe.

(Y37:1): ithâ ât ýazamaidê ahurem mazdãm
ýê gãmcâ ashemcâ dât apascâ
dât urvaråscâ vanguhîsh raocåscâ
dât bûmîmcâ vîspâcâ
vohû.

(after meal:)

ashem vohû...(4).

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ahmâi raêshca .... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd...)

atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!!

(Paz:)

In the name of God, the bestower, the giver, the benevolent! Ohrmazd is Lord!

(Av:)
Thus therefore do we worship Ahura Mazda,
who made the Kine (the living creation), and the
(embodied) Righteousness (which is incarnate in the
clean), and the waters, and the wholesome plants,
the stars, and the earth, and all (existing) objects
that are good.

(after meal:)

Ashem vohu...(4).

Yatha Ahu Vairyo...(2).

To him splendor...

Known as Waz Nan Xurdan, this prayer is used especially by lay persons. It
was traditionally said while holding
the barsom
.

Baj when answering the call of nature

guneh shkaste sad hazar bad

ýathâ ahû vairyô....

(here perform the natural function)

ashem vohû...(3).

>> humatanãm hûxtanãm hvarshtanãm
yadacâ anyadacâ verezyamnanãmcâ vâverezananãmcâ
mahî aibî-jaretârô naênaêstârô
ýathanâ vohunãm mahî. <<(2)

>> huxshathrôtemâi bât xshathrem ahmat
hyat aibî dademahicâ cîshmahicâ hvãmahicâ
hyat mazdâi ahurâi ashâicâ vahishtâi.
<<(3)

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(4).

ashem vohû...(3).

ahunem vairîm ýazamaide, ashem vahishtem sraêshtem
ameshem speñtem ýazamaide.

ýenghê hâtãm âat ýesne
paitî vanghô mazdå ahurô vaêthâ
ashât hacâ ýånghãmcâ tãscâ
tåscâ ýazamaide!!

May wrong actions be done away with a hundred-thousand times.

Yatha Ahu Vairyo...

(here perform the natural function)

Ashem vohu...(3).

>>We are praisers of good thoughts, of good
words, and of good actions, of those now and those
hereafter [(Pazand) of those being done; and of those
completed]. We implant (?) them (with our homage,
and we do this) the more, and yet the more since we
are (praisers) of the good (from whom they spring).
(y35.2)<<(2).

>>To the best of good rulers (is) verily the Kingdom,
because we render and ascribe it to Him, and
make it thoroughly His own (?), to Mazda Ahura
do we ascribe it, and to Righteousness the Best.
(y35.5)<<(3).

Yatha ahu Vairyo...(4).

Ashem vohu...(3).

We worship the Ahunwar.
We worship Best Asha, the most beautiful Amesha Spenta.

Yenghe... (Y18.9).

NOTES:

7. Translation from Modi
RCC
, p. 374. This prayer is also known as
"Pishab ni Baj."

Nirang-i Abezar

Pazand

>> shkasteh shekasteh shaotãn, âhreman
gacaste kâr ô kêrdâr, na-rasat gacaste
kâr ô kêrdâr, xareh i sî-ô-sê
ameshâspeñdãn dâdâr hormazd pîrôzgar
pâk. staômî ashem,

ashem vohû.... <<(3)

>> Broken, broken be Satan Ahriman. .... not reach me.
May the thirty-three Ameshaspands and the creator Ormazd be victorious.
I praise Asha. Ashem vohu.... <<(3)

The Gah dedications

Hawan Gah (sunrise to midday)

hâvanêe ashaone ashahe rathwe ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca

sâvanghêe vîsyâica ashaone ashahe rathwe
ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâicâ
frasastayaêca.

Rapithwin Gah (midday to mid-afternoon)

rapithwinâi ashaone ashahe rathwe ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca,

frâdat-fshave zañtumâica ashaone ashahe rathwe
ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâicâ
frasastayaêca.

Uzerin Gah (mid-afternoon to sunset)

uzayeirinâi ashaone ashahe rathwe ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca,

frâdat-vîrâi dâh'yumâica ashaone
ashahe rathwe ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâicâ
frasastayaêca.

Aiwisruthrem Gah (sunset to midnight)

aiwisrûthrimâi aibigayâi ashaone ashahe
rathwe ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca,

frâdat-vîspãm-hujyâitêe zarathushtrôtemâica
ashaone ashahe rathwe ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâicâ
frasastayaêca.

Ushahin Gah (midnight to dawn)

ushahinâi ashaone ashahe rathwe ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca,

berejyâi nmânyâica ashaone ashahe rathwe ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâicâ frasastayaêca.

(Hawan Gah)

To Hawan, Ashavan, the master of Asha, for worship, adoration, propitiation
and praise. To Savanghi and Visya, Ashavan, the master(s) of Asha, for
worship, adoration, propitiation and praise.

(Rapithwin Gah)

To Rapithwin, Ashavan, the master of Asha, for worship, adoration,
propitiation and praise. To Fradat-Fshu and Zangtuma, Ashavan, the master(s)
of Asha, for worship, adoration, propitiation and praise.

(Uzerin Gah)

To Uzerin, Ashavan, the master of Asha, for worship, adoration,
propitiation and praise. To Fradat-Vira and Dakhyuma, Ashavan, the master(s)
of Asha, for worship, adoration, propitiation and praise.

(Aiwisruthrem Gah)

To Aiwisruthrem that furthers life, Ashavan, the master of Asha, for
worship, adoration, propitiation and praise. To Fradat-vispam-hujyaiti and
Zarathushtrotema, Ashavan, the master(s) of Asha, for worship, adoration,
propitiation and praise.

(Ushahin Gah)

To Ushahin that furthers life, Ashavan, the master of Asha, for worship,
adoration, propitiation and praise. To Berejya and Nmanya, Ashavan, the
master(s) of Asha, for worship, adoration, propitiation and praise.

NOTES:

8. These five dedications are not recited independently.
Depending on the time of day, one of the five is recited where
indicated in other prayers.

Srosh Baj

Avestan (and Pazand)

0. (pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât, srôsh
i ashô i tagî i tan farmãn i shkaft zîn
i zîn awazâr i sâlâr i dãmã
i hôrmezd bê rasât. ezh hamâ gunâh
patit pashêmãnôm, ezh haravistîn dushmat
duzhûxt duzhvaresht men pa gêthî minît
vaem guft vaem kard vaem jast vaem bun bût estet ezh ã
gunâhihâ manishnî gaweshnî kunishnî
tanî rvãnî gêthî mainyuãnî
ôxe awaxsh pashêmã pa se gaweshnî pa
patit hôm!)

1. ýathâ ahû vairyô...(5).

ashem vohû...(3).

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

sraoshahe ashyehe taxmahe tanumãthrahe darshi draosh âhûiryehe

xshnaothra ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca.

ýathâ ahû vairyô, zaotâ frâ
mê mrûtê

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca, frâ ashava
vîdhvå mraotû.

2. sraoshem ashîm huraodhem verethrâjanem
frâdat-gaêthem ashavanem ashahe ratûm ýazamaide, ahunem
vairîm tanûm pâiti,

ýathâ ahû vairyô....

kêm-nâ mazdâ mavaitê pâyûm
dadå hyat mâ dregvå dîdareshatâ
aênanghê anyêm thwahmât âthrascâ
mananghascâ ýayå shyaothanâish ashem
thraoshtâ ahurâ tãm môi dãstvãm
daênayâi frâvaocâ,

kê verethrem-jâ thwâ pôi sêñghâ
ýôi heñtî cithrâ môi dãm
ahûmbish ratûm cizhdî at hôi vohû
seraoshô jañtû mananghâ mazdâ ahmâi
ýahmâi vashî kahmâicît.

3. pâta-nô tbishyañtat pairi mazdåsca
ârmaitishca speñtasca, nase daêvî druxsh
nase daêvô-cithre nase daêvô-frakarshte
nase daêvô-fradâiti, apa druxsh nase apa druxsh
dvâra apa druxsh vînase apâxedhre apa-nasyehe
mâ mereñcainîsh gaêthå astvaitîsh
ashahe, nemascâ ýâ ârmaitish îzhâcâ.

ashem vohû....

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

4. ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi
sraoshahe ashyehe taxmahe tanumãthrahe darshi draosh âhûiryehe.

ashem vohû....

0. In the name of God , May the bounteous miraculous power and
glory of Ohrmazd the lord increase. May it (i.e. the prayer) reach
Srosh, the righteous, the vigorous, whose body is the command,
having a hard weapon, powerful of weapon, the lord of the creations
of Ohrmazd. I am contrite for all sins and I desist from them,
from all bad thoughts, bad words and bad acts which I have thought,
spoken or done in the world, or which have happened through me,
or have originated with me. For those sins of thinking, speaking
and acting, of body and soul, worldly or spiritual, o Ohrmazd!
I am contrite, I renounce them. With three words I distance myself
(from them).

1. Yatha Ahu Vairyo...(5).

Ashem Vohu...(3).

I profess myself a Mazda-worshipper, a follower of Zarathushtra,
opposing the Daevas, accepting the Ahuric doctrine.

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

With propitiation of Sraosha, companion of Ashi , the brave, who
has the Manthra for body, with bold club, the ahurian, for worship,
adoration, propitiation, and praise.

'Yatha Ahu Vairyo', the zaotar should say to me

'Atha ratush ashatchit hacha', the Asha-sanctified knowing one
should say.

2. We worship Sraosha, companion of Ashi, fair of form, victorious,
world-promoting, the Ashavan, master of Asha . The Ahuna Vairya
prayer protects the body.

Yatha Ahu Vairyo....

What protector hast thou given unto me, O Mazda! while the hate
of the wicked encompasses me? Whom but thy Atar and Vohu-mano,
through whose work I keep on the world of righteousness? Reveal
therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule!

Who is the victorious who will protect thy teaching? Make it clear
that I am the guide for both worlds. May Sraosha come with Vohu-mano
and help whomsoever thou pleasest, O Mazda!

Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta!

Perish, O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish,
O creation of the fiend! Perish, O world of the fiend! Perish
away, O Druj! Rush away, O Druj! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away
to the regions of the north, never more to give unto death the
living world of Righteousness! Homage, with which (are combined)
devotion and milk offerings.

Ashem Vohu....

Yatha Ahu Vairyo....(2)

4. I desire worship and adoration and strength and force for
Sraosha, companion of Ashi, the brave, who has the Manthra for
body, with bold club, the ahurian.

Ashem Vohu....

NOTES:

9. English translation not found in
SBE
.

5.
ahmâi raêshca hvarenasca ahmâi tanvô
drvatâtem ahmâi tanvô vazdvare ahmâi tanvô
verethrem ahmâi îshtîm pourush-hvâthrãm
ahmâi âsnãmcit frazañtîm ahmâi
darekhãm darekhô-jîtîm ahmâi vahishtem
ahûm ashaonãm raocanghem vîspô-hvâthrem,
atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû....

hazangrem baêshazanãm baêvare baêshazanãm
(3).

ashem vohû....

jasa-mê avanghe mazda (3).

amahe hutâshtahe huraodhahe verethrakhnahe ahuradhâtahe
vanaiñtyåsca uparatâtô,
râmanasca
hvâstrahe vayaosh uparô-kairyehe taradhâtô
anyâish dâmãn. aêtat tê vayô
ýat tê asti speñtô-mainyaom.
thwâshahe
hvadhâtahe zrvânahe akaranahe zrvânahe darekhô-hvadhâtahe.

ashem vohû...!

(kerba mazhd gunâh guzârashni râ kunôm
ashahî rvã dushârm râ ham kerbaî
i hamâ vahã i haft keshwar zamî zamî
pahanâ rôt drânâ hvarshêt bâlâ
buñdahihâ bê rasât, ashô bêt
dêr zî.)

atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!!

5. Bestow on him riches and good things; bestow health of body,
toughness of body, and resistance of body; bestow on him possessions
giving abundant ease, future noble offspring, and a lengthy long
life; bestow on him the best existence of the Asha-sanctified,
the luminous, offering all happy.

Thus may it come as I wish.

Ashem Vohu....

A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies (3). Ashem Vohu....

Come to my help, O Mazda (3).

To Ama, well-built, fair of form, Verethraghna, Ahura-created;
and to Triumphing Uparatat; and to Raman of good pastures, and
to Vayu of superior activity, superior to other creatures. That
part of you, Vayu, which belongs to Spenta Mainyu; to self-governed
Thwasha, to boundless Zurwan, to Zurwan of the long dominion.

Ashem Vohu....

For the reward of virtue and the forgiveness of sins, I do (deeds
of) righteousness for the love of my soul. May all virtuousness
of all good ones of the earth of seven climes reach the width
of the earth, the length of the rivers, the height of the sun
in their original form. May it be righteous, live long. Thus may
it come as I wish.

Ashem Vohu...!!

10. This paragraph follows Bailey,
op. cit.
p. 10.

* Words that are here underlined are omitted while praying for the departed.

Hoshbam (prayer at dawn)

1. atha imã vacô dreñjayôish ýôi
anghen vârethrakhnyôtememca baêshazyôtememca,
pañca ahuna vairya frasrâvayôish,

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(5).

ahunem vairîm tanûm pâiti,

ýathâ ahû vairyô....

kêm-nâ mazdâ ... nemascâ ýâ
ârmaitish îzhâcâ.

ashem vohû....

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(21).

ashem vohû...(12).

2. nemase-tê (hôsh-bâmî)(3).

aêtat dim vîspanãm mazishtem dazdyâi
ahûmca ratûmca ýim ahurem mazdãm snathâi
angrahe mainyêush drvatô snathâi aêshmahe
xrvîm-draosh snathâi mâzainyanãm daêvanãm
snathâi vîspanãm daêvanãm varenyanãmca
drvatãm.

(vâzh bê guft,)

(shkasta ganâmainyô âharman br lêânat
sat hazâr bâr.)

3. fradathâi ahurahe mazdå raêvatô hvarenanguhatô
fradathâi ameshanãm speñtanãm fradathâi
tishtryehe stârô raêvatô hvarenanguhatô
fradathâi narsh ashaonô fradathâi vîspanãm
speñtahe mainyêush dâmanãm ashaonãm.

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

4. vanghuca vanghåsca âfrînâmi vîspayå
ashaonô stôish haithyâica bavãithyâica
bûshyãithyâica ashîm râsaiñtîm
darekhô-vârethmanem

mishâcim hvô-aiwishâcim

mishâcim âfrasånghaitîm

bareñtîm vîspå baêshazå

apãmca gavãmca urvaranãmca

taurvayeiñtîm vîspå tbaêshå

daêvanãm mashyânãmca

areshyañtãm ahmâica nmânâi

ahmâica nmânahe nmânô-patêe.

vanguhîshca adhå vanguhîshca ashayô hupaurvå
vahehîsh aparå râsaiñtîsh darekhô-
vârethmanô ýatha-nô mazishtåsca
vahishtåsca sraêshtåsca ashayô erenavañte.

ameshanãm speñtanãm ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca fradathâi
ahe nmânahe fradathâi vîspayå ashaonô
stôish hamistêe vîspayå drvatô stôish,
stavas ashâ ýê hudå ýôi
heñtî.

vasasca tû ahura-mazda ushtâca xshaêsha havanãm
dâmanãm, vasô âpô vasô urvarå
vasô vîspa vohû ashacithra xshayamnem ashavanem
dâyata axshayamnem drvañtem.

vasô-xshathrô hyât ashava, avasô-xshathrô
hyât drvå gatô hamistô nizhberetô
haca speñtahe mainyêush dâmabyô varatô
avasô-xshathrô.

haxshaya azemcit ýô zarathushtrô fratemã
nmânanãmca vîsãmca zañtunãmca
dah'yunãmca ainghå daênayå anumatayaêca
anuxtayaêca anvarshtayaêca ýâ âhûirish
zarathushtrish.

5. ýatha-nô ånghãm shyâtô

manå vahishtô urvãnô

hvâthravaitîsh tanvô heñti

vahishtô anghush âkåscôit

âhûire mazda jaseñtãm.

>> asha vahishta asha sraêshta daresâma
thwâ pairi thwâ jamyama hamem thwâ haxma.

ashem vohû.... <<(3)

ahmâi raêshca .... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd...)

atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!!

1. Then thou shalt say those victorious, most healing words;
thou shalt chant the Ahunwar five times:

Yatha ahu vairyo... (5).

The Ahunwar protects the body....

Kem na Mazda: "What protector hast thou given..."

Ashem vohu....

Yatha Ahu Vairyo...(21).

Ashem vohu...(12)

2. Homage to you, O Dawn (3).

(Y27.1-2:)

This is to render Him who is of all the greatest, our lord
and master (even) Ahura Mazda. And this to smite the wicked Angra
Mainyu, and to smite Aeshma of the bloody spear, and the Mazainya
Daevas, and to smite all the wicked Varenya Daevas.

3. And this is to further Ahura Mazda, the resplendent, the glorious,
to further the Bountiful Immortals, and the influences of the
star Tishtrya, the resplendent, the glorious, (and) to the furtherance
of the holy man, and of all the (bountiful and) holy creatures
of the Bounteous Spirit.

(Y52.1-4:)

4. I pray with benedictions for a benefit, and for the good,
even for the entire creation of the holy (and the clean); I beseech
for them for the (generation which is) now alive, for that which
is just coming into life, and for that which shall be hereafter.
And (I pray for that) sanctity which leads to prosperity, and
which has long afforded shelter, which goes on hand in hand with
it, which joins it in its walk, and of itself becoming its close
companion as it delivers forth its precepts, bearing every form
of healing virtue which comes to us in waters, appertains to cattle,
or is found in plants, and overwhelming, all the harmful malice
of the Daevas, (and their servants) who might harm this dwelling
and its lord, bringing good gifts, and better blessings, given
very early, and later (gifts), leading to successes, and for a
long time giving shelter. And so the greatest, and the best, and
most beautiful benefits of sanctity fall likewise to our lot.

For the sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and the praise of the
Bountiful Immortals, for the bringing prosperity to this abode,
and for the prosperity of the entire creation of the holy, and
the clean, (and as for this, so) for the opposition of the entire
evil creation. (And I pray for this) as I praise through Righteousness,
I who am beneficent, those who are (likewise of a better mind).

(Y8.5-7:)

May'st Thou, O Ahura Mazda! reign at Thy will, and with a
saving rule over Thine own creatures, and render Ye the holy (man)
also a sovereign at his will over waters, and over plants, and
over all the clean and sacred (creatures) which contain the seed
of Righteousness. Strip ye the wicked of all power!

Absolute in power may the holy be, bereft of all free choice the
wicked ! Gone (may he be), met as foe, carried out from the creatures
of Spenta Mainyu, hemmed in without power over any wish!

----------

I will incite, even I who am Zarathushtra, the heads of the houses,
villages, Zantus, and provinces, to the careful following of this
Religion which is that of Ahura, and according to Zarathushtra,
in their thoughts, their words, and their deeds.

(Y60.11 seq.:)

5. In order that our minds may be delighted, and our souls the
best, let our bodies be glorified as well, and let them; O Mazda!
go likewise openly (unto Heaven) as the best world of the saints
as devoted to Ahura, and accompanied by Asha Vahishta (who is
Righteousness the Best), and the most beautiful! And may we see
Thee, and may we, approaching, come around about Thee, and attain
to entire companionship with Thee!

Ashem Vohu...(3).

Bestow on him riches...

Ashem Vohu...!!

Doa Tan-Dorostri (blessing)

Pazand

NOTES:

11. Translation from Boyce, Textual Sources, pp. 59-60.

ba nãm i ýazad i baxshâyañdeh i baxshâyashgar
i meherbãn.

In the name of God, the bestower, the giver, the benevolent!

ýathâ ahû vairyô...
(2).

Yatha ahu vairyo...
(2).

tan-darôstî dêr-zîvashnî âwâyat
hvareh hañgat ashahîdâr ýazdãn i
mînôyãn ýazdãn i gethyãn haft
amshâspañdãn myazd rôshan hamê
bê-rasât.

May there be health and long life, complete Glory giving righteousness! May
the visible yazads and the invisible yazads and the seven Amashaspands come to
this fair offering.

în dôâyãn bât, în hvahâyãn
bât, hame añdar kasãn ra zartôshtî dîn
shât bât, êdûn bât.
ýâbârî hvadâ hvadâ-vañd
i
âlam râ hamâ hañjaman râ

May this household be happy, may there be blessing! May
there be happiness among the people of the religion of Zartosht! We beseech
you, Lord, to grant to the present ruler, to all the community, and to all
those of the Good Religion, health and fair repute.

12. qodavand

(
(Insert title:)
Behdin/Ervad/Osta/Osti
N.
-râ)
bâ farzañdãn
hazâr sâl dêr
bê-dâr u shat bê-dâr u tan-darost bê-dâr u
êdûn bê dâr bar sar i arzânyãn
sâlhâ i bîsyâr u karanhâ i bîshumâr
bâkî u pâyañde dâr sat
hazârãn
hazâr âfrîn bât.

May so-and-so, [and his wife (or, her husband), and children]
live for a thousand years! Keep them long happy, long healthy,
long just! Keep them thus, keep them caring for the deserving!
Keep them living and abiding for many years and countless hours!
A hundred thousand thousand blessings upon them!

13. Here name the person or persons to be blessed. "If the recital is for a
Behdin, prefix the word Behdin before the name of both man and woman; if a
member of the priestly class use the word 'Ervad' before his name if he has
gone through the Navar ceremony, otherwise prefix the word 'Osta' to his
name. Before the name of a woman from a priestly class use the word
'Osti'."
Khordeh Avesta (in Roman script) 9 Yasht
, Union Press, Bombay,
1982 - p. 321.

14. The last two words are omitted in Antia.

15. Kanga & Sontakke, p. 324.

sâl hvacasta bât.
rôz farrohv bât mâh mubârak
bât.
cañdin sâl cañdin rôz cañdin mâh

May the year be auspicious,
the day fortunate, the month propitious in all these years and days and
months!

16. Mobed Firouz Azargoshab's
Khordah Avesta
, p. 22 reads "farhkondah."

bîsyâr sâl arzãnîdâr ýazashne u
nyâishne u râdî u zôr barashne ashahîdâr
awarê hamâ kâr u kerfehâ tan-darôstî
bât nêkî bât h'ub bât.

For many years keep them worthy to perform worship and utter prayers,
to give charity and offerings, being just. May they have health to fulfill
all their duties! May they be liberal, kind and good!

êdûn bât.

êdûntarac bât.
pa ýazdãn u ameshâspañdãn kãme
bât.

May it be so, may it
be more so, may it be according to the wish of the Yazads and the
Ameshaspands!

17. Antia ends at this point.

ashem vohû...

Ashem vohu....

Patet Pashemani (prayer of repentance)

Pazand

NOTES:

Text from Antia,
Pazand Texts
, pp. 118-125.

0. ýathâ ahû vairyô pañj ezh hamâ gunâh patita pashêmânôm az har wistîn dushmata duzhhûxta duzhhvreshta mem pa gêthî manît pêsh shumâ vihãn manishnî gawishnî kunishnî tanî ruãnî gêthî mainyvãnî aoxi awâxsh pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî papatita hôm
ýathâ ahû vairyô.... (5). ashem vohû....(3)

frâvarâne ... (gah) ... frasastayaeca

sraoshahe ashyehe taxmahe tanum&thrahe darshi draosh âhûiryehe.

xshnaotha ... vîdhvå mraotû, ýathâ ahû vairyô....

1. frâj stâim harawista humata hûxta hvareshta pa manishni gavishni kunishni avâj stâym haravista dushmata duzh-hûxta duzh-hvareshta ezh manishni gawishni kunishni, avar-gîrashnî dahôm hamawista humata hûxta hvareshta, pa manishni gavishni kunishni ku kereba kunem, bahilashnî dahôm harvista dushmata duzhhûxta duzhhvareshta ezh manishni gawishni kunishni ku gunâh ne kunam
frâj ôi shumâra diham kê ameshâspeñt hêt, izishni u nyâishni, frâj pa manishni frâj pa gavishni, frâj pa kunishni, frâj pa ôiha, frâj pa tan, frâj pa ãnica ýim h'aêsha zãm, tan u jãn nãmi ruãn. bun bar h'âsta în hasta, pa h'êsh ýazdãn dâr hôm. pa h'êsh ýazdãn dâsten ê bahôt ku agar thash azãn rast, kê în tar rvãn râ ba-âwâyat dâdhen bêdahm
astâym ashahî pahilem, nigônem dêvãn. pa nêkî dâdhâr hôrmezda sepâs dâr hôm. pa patyâr anâî ezh ganâ-mainyô avar mat, ômêt rastâxezh-râ padish h'uraseñt ham-dâstãn hôm. dîn hôrmezda dât zarathushtra, rastay frâtvn, karat paoirô-tkaêshãn pa dastûr dâr hôm. ãn jâdarâ ezh gunâh pa patita hôm pa patita hôm ezh gunâh.

2. ku mardumã u bun shâyat bûtan ayå man ô bun bût êstet, pes ô hacir añdâ, pes ô cihir pesh, ýat-shãn añdar jasta êstat, aj se sraoshô-jaranãm gunâh, ezh ãnî tum gunâh añda hazârã hazâr maragarzãn añda ceñda geush hasta shâyat bûdan, pa nãma cista, harvista dushmat duzhhûxta duzhhûareshta, mem parâhi kasã-râ, ayå kasã pa râhi man-râ, ayå gunâh-kârî pa men-râ kashô gunâh, ô bun bût êstat, ezh ãn gunahyâ manishnî gawishnî kunishnî tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî papatita hôm; papatita hôm ezh gunâh.

3. în añdha âxô pâê gunâh nãm; cûn hañdaraxta, maidhyô-sâsta, añdaraz-framãn, buaidhyô-jat, kaidhyô-jat, âgerefta gunâh, avâvareshta gunâh, ardus gunâh, h'arahe gunâh, bâbâi gunâh, yâtu gunâh, tanvalgãn gunâh, maragarzãn gunâh, aiwisôs garãn gunâh, jihir mazda gunâ, dashtãn marza gunâh, kun maraza gunâh, avârûn marzashnî, shathra gunâh shasnî, gunâhi ruãnî, gunâh hamê mâlãn, gunâhîôi ful shhôt, vaxshê vaxshãn vaxshê gunâh, gunâh ezh gunâh, avarê âxo gunâ, ku maradhumãn ô bun shâyat bûten gajista ganâmainyô darvañt papatyâr dâmãn hôrmezda frâzh karnît.

hôrmezda h'odhâi gunâh añdar dîn paidhâ bê-kirt, guhãn paoiryô-tkaêshãn gunâh dâsht êstat. manishnî pêsh dâdhâr hôrmedza mainyã gaithyãn mihesta pêsh amêshâspeñdãn, pêsh mihir srôsh rashni, pêsh âtash barsma hôm, pêsh dîn ruãn h'êsh, pêsh rat dastûr dînî, pêsh ôi gwah mat êstat, azh ãn gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm azh gunâh.

4. añdar pit mât h'uh birât, zan frazañt, shûî sâlâr, h'aêsh nazdîk, ham-gêhãnyãn, ham-h'âstagãn, hamsâigãn, ham-shahiryãn, pa irimãnyãn, jasta pa har adhâdye, cûn men añdar gunâh kâr bût êsta hôm ezh ãn gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm; ezh gunâ.

5. hihir u nasâ h'urishnî, hihir u nasâ jôishnî hihir u nasâ ôi âv âtash burden, ayå âv âtash hihir u nasâ burden, avistâ pa ci manishnî nê guftan, mûî nâxûn dañdãn frêsh, dasta shavî, u avar harci padar hihir nasâ. cun man añdar gunâhgâr bût êstat hôm, ezh ãn gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm ezh gunâh.

6. ku kãmi dâdhâr hôrmezda bût, uim âvâyast manîdhen, uim ni manît; uim âvâyast guftan, uim na gufta; uim âvâyast kardan, uim ni kard; ezh ãn gunâh manashnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm ezh gunâh.

7. ku kãmi âhâreman bût, uim nê-âwâyast manîdan, uim manît, uim nê-awâyast guftan, uim guft, uim nê-âwâyast karden, uim kard: ezh ãn gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm ezh gunâh.

8. ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh har âin margarzãn, har âin frôt mãd, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh ezh gunâh, uim añdar, hôrmezd mardum, mardum sardagã jasta, pa patita hôm.

(ii) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh, har âin margarzãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh ezh gunâh, uim añdar, bahman gâu, gôspeñt, gôspeñt sardagã jasta, pa patita hom.

(iii) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh har âin margarzãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh ezh gunâh, uim añdar, ardaibahishta, âtash, âtash sardagã jasta, pa patita hôm.

(iv) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh, har âin margarazãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh, ezh gunâh, uim añdar shaharevar, ayaoxshasta, ayaoxshast sardagã jasta, pa patita hôm.

(v) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh, har âin margarzãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh ezh gunâh, uim añdar, aspeñdârmat zamîn, zamîn sardagã jasta, pa patita hôm.

(vi) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh, har âin margarzãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâ ezh gunâ, uim añdar, h'urdât âu, âu tuxmagã jasta, pa patita hôm.

(vii) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh, har âin margarazãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh ezh gunâh, uim añdar, ameredât urvar, urvar sardagã jasta, pa patita hôm.

(viii) ezh hamôîn har âin gunâh, har âin margarzãn, har âin frôt mãt, har âin mânît, har âin gunâh ezh gunâh, uim añdar, dãmi hôrmezda jast cûn star, mâh u h'arshêt, âtash suhar sôzâ, sag, vae, gôspeñt pañj âin, avarê gwahe dahisnãn în hôrmezda h'êsh, cûn añdarg zamîn âsmãn cun man añdar gunâh kâr bût êstat hôm ezh ã gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm pa patita hôm. ezh gunâh.

9. star shikashnî, h'aetûô datha vasô-vashnî, dûdaî vahã vasô-vasnî, gahañbâr, farvardyãn, hûm darûn, hush frît ýazdã nihât u pidîrafta, rapithwan fradum, rôz gudardagã, cûn man âvâyast ýashtan, uim nê ýashta, ezh ã gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm ezh gunâh.

10. avar manashnî, tar manishnî, azûrî, pañdî, xshmaganî, arashganî, vat-cashmî, sôr-cashmî vat-nigarashnî, h'urdaka-nigarashnî, nigêrâî, pañdî, h'ût-shahî, ashagahinî, spôzh-gârî, varanî, gumânî, âsmôî, zuru-guâhî, darôkh-dâvarî, az-dêv parastî, kushât duârishnî, barhina duârishnî, êmôka duârishnî, darâiã-jôishnî, darâiã-h'urashnî, duzdî, gadhî, jahî, jâdvî, jâdû-parastî, rôspî, rôspa bârahî, gawahe paiti, gawahê vanîdaî, shîn-môi, avarê har âin gunâh, ô pa în paititî xshumarda, ãn nê-xshumarda, ãni dânista, ãni nê dânista, ãni añkart, ãni nê-añkart, seraoshâdâ varzyhâ pêsh rat dastûr dînî âwâyast gûrazîdan, uim nê-gûrazît, ezh ã gunâh manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm; pa patita hôm ezh gunâh.

11. ku agar kasã paititî pidîrafta hôm, uim nê-karda hôm, êshã ruã-râ dush-h'uârî mat. hêt shã jâdharâ, har ýak jut jut-râ, manishnî gawishnî kunishnî, tanî ruãnî gêthî minvãnî, oxi avâxsha pashêmãn pa sê gawishnî pa patita hôm: pa patita hôm, ezh gunâh.

12. pa ã dîn dastûr êstahôm, în hôrmezda zarathushtra câshta, zarathushtra gushtâspa. pa paivañt âdarbât bin mârspeñdãn mat. padash pasâxta karda buxta. ashahî vahi ruãn dushârm-râ âvâisnîm-tar vahi-ashhî hôm.
pa jîvañdî jã astvã hôm hamata pa manishni, âstvã hôm hûxta pa gaveshni, âstvã hôm hvareshta pa kunishni, âstvã hôm pa gawhidîn mâazdayasnãn, hamâ kerebayâ hamdâstã hôm ezh hamâ gunâhyâ jût-dâistã hôm. pa nekî sipâs-dâr hôm; ezh anâî h'urasañt hôm pul pâdhafrâh bañd drvsh, tujishni tâvã dîn pâdafrâh sê shaw pañjâh hafta sâl, padash h'uresañt ham-dâstã hôm.
uim karda-hôm în paititî, guzarg aomêt kerebarâ, girãn bîm dôzhx-râ. ashahî vahe ruãn dushârm-râ: pa manishni karda-hôm. ku kâr kereba manemdânû karta, ã ci nû kunôm, hamâ êstishnî kerebarâ guzârashnî gunâh-râ buxtî rvã-râ. agar mãdae bahôt, ku gunâh men tauxta nê-bahôt, pâdafrâh sê shab âinahyâ padhash h'araseñda ham-dâstã hôm.
hamê framâim ashem vôhû bê gudîrashnî, paititî pas azh bêhgudîrashnî pas gudarda men, men jâdarâ ezh gunâh pa patita bahut. sêdaesh gaêtufrît framâyat framûdâr h'âishnî hama dâistã hôm; hôrmezda h'êsh hôm, hôrmezda dahmânî kunôm, ashahî stâim
uim gerefta hôm harvista humata hûxta hvarshta, pa manishni gawishni kunishni. bahulasta dahôm harvista dushmata duzhhûxta duzhhvarsheta, ezh manishni gawishni kunishni. uim gerefta hôm harvista humata hûxta hvareshta. pa manishni gawishni kunishni. bahilast dahôm harvista dush-mata duzhhûxta duzhhvareshta, ezh manishni gawishni kunishni, uim gerefta hôm harvista humata hûxta hvareshta. pa manishni gawishni kunishni, bahilasta dahôm harvista dushmata duzhhûxta duzhhvareshta, ezh manishni gawishni kunishni
uem gerefta hôm harvista râh rastaî frârûn; bahilasta dahôm harwista râh arastî awârû; gana shkast, hôrmezda bihi awazûn;

staomi ashem, ashem vohû....

ferastuye humatôibyascâ huxtôibyascâ hvarshtôibyascâ, mânthwôi­byascâ vaxedhwôibyascâ varshtvôibyascâ. aibi-gairyâ daithe vispâ humatâcâ huxtâcâ hvarshtâcâ. paiti-ricyâ daithe vispâ dushmatâcâ duzhuxtâcâ duzhvarshtâcâ.

ferâ vê râhî ameshâ speñtâ ýasnemcâ vahmemcâ ferâ mananghâ ferâ vacanghâ ferâ shyaothanâ ferâ anghuyâ ferâ tanvascît xvah'yå ushtanem.

staomî ashem, ashem vohû....

ýathâ ahû vairyô....(21) ashem vohû....(12) ýathâ ahû vairyô....(2)
ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi,

sraoshahe ashyehe taxmahe tanum&thrahe darshi draosh âhûiryehe.

ashem vohû....

ahmâi raêshca .... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... kerba mazhd.... ashem vohû....

ka_part1

Glossary


================================================================================
Khorda Avesta - Niyayeshes
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/niyayesh.htm
================================================================================

niyayeshes

Glossary

AVESTA: KHORDA AVESTA (Book of Common Prayer)

This digital edition copyright © 2002 by Joseph H. Peterson.

NIYAYESHES (Litanies)

Khwarshed Niyayesh (Litany to the Sun)

0.

(pa nãm i ýazdã, stâem zbâem
dâdâr hôrmezd i rayômañd i hvarahemañd
i harvisp âgâh i kardagâr i hvadâwañdã
hvadâwañd i pâdishâh bar hamâ pâdishâhã
i nagâhdâr i xâlik i maxlûk arizk rôzhî
dahiñda i kâdir u kavî u kadîm i baxshâiñda
i baxshâishgar i mihirbãn, tvãnâ u dânâ

u pâk parwardagâr, âdil pâdishâhî
ithô bêzavâl bâshat,

hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî gurz hvarahe
awazâyât,

hvarshêt i amarg i rayômañd i aurvañd
asp [bê rasât
],

ezh hamâ gunâh patit pashêmãnôm,
ezh haravistîn dushmat duzhûxt duzhvaresht men pa
gêthî minît vaem guft vaem kard vaem jast vaem
bun bût estet ezh ã gunâhihâ manishnî
gaweshnî kunishnî tanî rvãnî gêthî
mainyuãnî ôxe awaxsh pashêmã pa
se gaweshnî pa patit hôm!)

0.

In the name of God. I praise and invoke the creator Ormazd,
the radiant, glorious, omniscient, maker, lord of lords, king
over all kings, watchful, creator of the universe, giver of daily
bread, powerful, strong, eternal, forgiver, merciful, loving,
mighty, wise, holy, and nourisher. May (his) just kingdom be imperishable.
May the majesty and glory of Ormazd, the beneficent lord, increase.
(Hither) may come the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun. Of
all sins ... I repent.

NOTES:

1. Based on edition of Karl F. Geldner,
Avesta, the Sacred
Books of the Parsis,
Stuttgart, 1896.

2. Translation by Dhalla, 1908.

3. GJM, GKE append "u dâdâr".

4. The Guj. Kh. Av. append; deest F1, Pt1, L18, P13, K12.

1.

nemase-tê ahura mazda (3),

thrîshcit parô anyâish dâmãn, nemô
vê ameshâ speñtâ vîspe hvare-hazaoshå,
aêtat jahât ahurem mazdãm aêtat ameshê
speñtê aêtat ashaonãm fravashish aêtat
vayãm darekhô-hvadhâtem.

2.

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem, staomi ashem,

ashem vohû....

3.

frastuyê humatôibyascâ hûxtôibyascâ
hvarshtôibyascâ mãthwôibyascâ vaxedhwôibyascâ
varshtvôibyascâ, aibigairyâ daithê vîspâ
humatâcâ hûxtâcâ hvarshtâcâ,
paitiricyâ daithê vîspâ dushmatâcâ
duzhûxtâcâ duzhvarshtâcâ.

4.

ferâ vê râhî ameshâ speñtâ
ýasnemcâ vahmemcâ ferâ mananghâ
ferâ vacanghâ ferâ shyaothanâ ferâ
anghuyâ ferâ tanvascît hvah'yå ushtanem.
staomî ashem,

ashem vohû....

5.

nemô ahurâi mazdâi nemô ameshaêibyô
speñtaêibyô nemô mithrâi vouru-gaoyaoitêe
nemô hvarexshaêtâi aurvat-aspâi nemô
âbyô dôithrâbyô ýå
ahurahe mazdå nemô gêush nemô gayehe nemô
zarathushtrahe spitâmahe ashaonô fravashêe nemem
vîspayå ashaonô stôish haithyâica
bavãithyâica bûshyãithyâica.

(During Hawan Gah recite:)

vohû uxshyâ mananghâ xshathrâ ashâcâ
ushtâ tanûm (3). ashem vohû...(3).

(During Rapithwin Gah recite:)

imâ raocå barezishtem barezimanãm (3).
ashem vohû...(3).

(During Uzerin Gah recite:)

ýahmî speñtâ thwâ mainyû
urvaêsê jasô (3). ashem vohû...(3).

6.

mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm ýazamaide

arsh-vacanghem vyâxanem

hazangra-gaoshem hutâshtem

baêvare-cashmanem berezañtem

perethu-vaêdhayanem sûrem

ahvafnem jakhâurvånghem.

7.

mithrem vîspanãm dah'yunãm

dainghupaitîm ýazamaide

ýim fradathat ahurô

mazdå hvarenanguhastemem

mainyavanãm ýazatanãm,

tat nô jamyât avanghe

mithra ahurâ berezañta,

hvare-xshaêtem ameshem raêm

aurvat-aspem ýazamaide.

8.

tishtrîm drvô-cashmanem ýazamaide, tishtrîm
ýazamaide, tishtryaênyô ýazamaide, tishtryô
raêvå hvarenanguhå ýazamaide, vanañtem
stârem mazdadhâtem ýazamaide, tishtrîm
stârem raêvañtem hvarenanguhañtem ýazamaide,
thwâshem hvadhâtem ýazamaide, zrvânem
akaranem ýazamaide, zrvânem darekhô-hvadhâtem
ýazamaide, vâtem speñtem hudhånghem
ýazamaide, razishtãm cistãm mazdadhâtãm
ashaonîm ýazamaide, daênãm vanguhîm
mâzdayasnîm ýazamaide, pathãm hvâstâitîm
ýazamaide, zaranumañtem sûrem ýazamaide,
saokeñtem gairîm mazdadhâtem ýazamaide.

9.

vîspemca ashavanem mainyaom ýazatem ýazamaide,
vîspemca ashavanem gaêthîm ýazatem ýazamaide,
haom urvânem ýazamaide, havãm fravashîm
ýazamaide, jasa-mê avanghe mazda, ashâunãm
vanguhîsh sûrå speñtå fravashayô
ýazamaide, hvarexshaêtem ameshem raêm aurvat-aspem
ýazamaide,

ashem vohû...(3)!

10.

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

hvarexshaêtahe ameshahe raêvahe aurvat-aspahe xshnaothra
ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca,

ýathâ ahû vairyô zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê,

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca frâ ashava vîdhvå
mraotû.

1.

Homage to you, O Ahura Mazda, trice prior to other creatures.
Homage to you, O Amesha Spentas, all of one accord with the Sun.
May this (homage) seek its way so as to reach to Ahura Mazda,
this (homage) to the Amesha Spentas, this (homage) to the Fravashis
of the righteous, this to Vayu, that follows its own law for the
Long Period.

2.

Propitiation to Ahura Mazda.... I praise Asha.

3.

I praise good thoughts, good words, and good deeds and those
that are to be thought, spoken, and done. I do accept all good
thoughts, good words, and good deeds. I do renounce all evil thoughts,
evil words, and evil deeds.

4.

I proffer to you, O Amesha Spentas, sacrifice and prayer,
with thought, with word, with deed, with (my) being, with the
very life of my body. I praise Asha.

5.

Homage to Ahura Mazda. Homage to the Amesha Spentas. Homage
to Mithra of wide cattle pastures. Homage to the Sun, the swift-horsed.
Homage to these two eyes that are of Ahura Mazda. Homage to the
Bull. Homage to Gaya (Maretan) [Gayomard]. Homage to the Fravashi of the
righteous Spitama Zarathushtra. Homage to the whole creation of
the Righteous One, that is, that is coming into being and that
will be.

(During Hawan Gah recite:)

Further the body through Vohuman, Khshathra, and Asha in accordance
with (my) desire.

(During Rapithwin Gah recite:)

(To) these lights, the highest (light) of the high.

(During Uzerin Gah recite:)

At which end you (i.e. Ahura Mazda) will come with your Beneficent
Spirit.

6.

We sacrifice to the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun. We
sacrifice to Mithra of wide cattle pastures,

Whose word is true, who is of the assembly,

Who has a thousand ears, the well-shaped one,

Who has ten thousand eyes, the exalted one,

Who has wide knowledge, the helpful one,

Who sleeps not, the ever wakeful.

7.

We sacrifice to Mithra

The lord of all countries,

Whom Ahura Mazda created the most glorious

Of the supernatural yazads.

So may there come to us for aid

Both Mithra and Ahura, the two exalted ones.

We sacrifice to the immortal,

Radiant, swift-horsed Sun.

8.

We sacrifice to Tishtrya of sound eyes. We sacrifice to Tishtrya.
We sacrifice to those attendants on Tishtrya. We sacrifice to
Tishtrya, the radiant (and) glorious. We sacrifice to the star
Vanant, made by Mazda. We sacrifice to the star Tishtrya, the
radiant (and) glorious. We sacrifice to the Sky that follows its
own law. We sacrifice to the boundless Time. We sacrifice to Time,
that follows its own law for the long period. We sacrifice to
the wind, the holy (and) beneficent. We sacrifice to Wisdom, the
most upright, righteous, made by Mazda. We sacrifice to the good
Mazdayasnian Religion. We sacrifice to the Path leading to the
good state. We sacrifice to the golden shaft. We sacrifice to
Mount Saokanta, made by Mazda.

9.

We sacrifice to every righteous Yazad of the spiritual world.
We sacrifice to every righteous Yazad of the material world. We
sacrifice to our own soul. We sacrifice to our own Fravashi. Come
to my help, O Mazda. We sacrifice to the good, helpful, holy Fravashis
of the righteous. We sacrifice to the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed
Sun.

10.

I proclaim ... of the Ahurian Faith.

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication)

Propitiation ... glorification to the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed
Sun. As (he is) the Lord that is to be chosen ... let one who
knows it pronounce it to me.

11.

hvarexshaêtem ameshem raêm aurvat-aspem ýazamaide.
âat ýat hvare raoxshne tâpayeiti âat
ýat hvare raocô tâpayeiti hishteñti
mainyavånghô ýazatånghô satemca
hazangremca, tat hvarenô hañbârayeiñti
tat hvarenô nipârayeiñti tat hvarenô
baxsheñti zãm paiti ahuradhâtãm, frâdhatica
ashahe gaêthå frâdhatica ashahe
tanuyê

11.

We sacrifice to the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun. When
the Sun warms with its light, when the sunlight gives warmth,
there stand the spiritual Yazads, a hundred and a thousand. They
gather together this glory. They distribute this glory. They bestow
this glory upon the earth made by Ahura, with the furtherance
of the world of Asha, with the furtherance of the material existence
of Asha, with the furtherance of the Sun that (is) immortal, radiant,
swift-horsed.

5. J9.10, Jm4, F1, Pt1, L25, 18, 9, 11, P13, K18a (sec. m.),
18c, 19 append here "frâdhatica hvare ýat ameshem
raêm aurvat aspem." which words are not found in F2,
Mf3, K36, W1, J15, P14, L12, M6, K18a (pr. m.) or in P.V.

12.

âat ýat hvare uzuxshyeiti bvat zãm ahuradhâtãm
ýaozhdâthrem âpem taciñtãm ýaozhdâthrem
âpem xayanãm ýaozhdâthrem âpem
zrayanãm ýaozhdâthrem âpem aremaêshtãm
ýaozhdâthrem bvat dãma ashava ýaozhdâthrem

ýå heñti speñtahe mainyêush.

13.

ýeidhi-zî hvare nôit uzuxshyeiti adha daêva
vîspå mereñciñti ýå heñti
haptô-karshvôhva, nava-cish mainyava ýazata
anghava astvaiñti paiti-drãm nôit paitishtãm
vîdheñti.

14.

ýô ýazaite hvare ýat ameshem raêm
aurvat-aspem paitishtâtêe temanghãm paitishtâtêe
temascithranãm daêvanãm paitishtâtêe
tâyunãmca hazasnãmca paitishtâtêe
ýâtunãmca pairikanãmca paitishtâtêe
ithyejanghô mareshaonahe

ýazaite ahurem mazdãm

ýazaite ameshê speñtê

ýazaite haom urvânem xshnâvayeiti vîspe
mainyavaca ýazata gaêthyâca ýô
ýazaite hvare ýat ameshem raêm aurvat- aspem.

15.

ýazâi mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm hazangra-gaoshem
baêvare-cashmanem,

ýazâi vazrem hunivixtem

kameredhe paiti daêvanãm mithrô ýô
vouru-gaoyaoitish,

ýazâi haxedhremca ýat asti haxedhranãm
vahishtem añtare månghemca hvareca!

16.

ahe raya hvarenanghaca

tem ýazâi surunvata ýasna

hvarexshaêtem ameshem raêm

aurvat-aspem zaothrâbyô.

hvarexshaêtem ameshem raêm

aurvat-aspem ýazamaide

haomayô gava baresmana

hizvô danghangha mãthraca

vacaca shyaothnaca zaothrâbyasca

arshuxdhaêibyasca vâkhzhibyô. ýenghê
hâtãm âat ýesnê paitî vanghô
mazdå ahurô vaêthâ ashât hacâ
ýånghãmcâ tãscâ tåscâ
ýazamaide.

(Recite silently:)

(hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât.)

(Recite aloud:)

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

17.

ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi

hvarexshaêtahe ameshahe raêvahe aurvat-aspahe.

12.

When the Sun rises up, purification comes to the earth made
by Ahura, purification to the flowing waters, purification to
the waters of the wells, purification to the water of the seas,
purification to the water that is standing. Purification comes
to the righteous creation, which is of the Beneficent Spirit.

13.

If indeed the Sun were not to rise, then the daevas would
kill all things that are in the seven regions. Not at all would
the spiritual Yazads find support and stability in the material
world.

14.

Whoever sacrifices to the Sun that is immortal, radiant, (and)
swift-horsed, in order to withstand darkness, to withstand the
daevas, the progeny of darkness, to withstand the theives and
robbers, to withstand the sorcerers and the enchantresses, to
withstand death that creeps on,

He sacrifices to Ahura Mazda, he sacrifices to the Amesha Spentas,
he sacrifices to his own soul.

He propitiates all heavenly and earthly Yazads, who sacrifices
to the Sun that is immortal, radiant, swift-horsed.

15.

I shall sacrifice to Mithra of wide cattle pastures, who has
a thousand ears, ten thousand eyes. I shall sacrifice to his mace,
well aimed against the skulls of the Daevas, Mithra of wide cattle
pastures. And I shall sacrifice to that friendship which is the
best of friendships, that between the Moon and the Sun.

16.

For his splendor and fortune I shall sacrifice to him with
audible worship, the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun, with
libations. We sacrifice to the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed
Sun, with milk provided with Haoma, with the Barsom, with skill
of tongue, and with the spell, and with word, and with deeds,
and with libations, and with rightly spoken words.

Of whomsoever among beings Ahura Mazda has known the excellence
(lit. something better) in Yasna-sacrifice in accordance with
Asha, to both these males and females we sacrifice.

(Recite quietly:) ....

Y.A.V.(2)

I desire worship and adoration and strength and force for the
immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun.

17.

I bless the sacrifice ... of the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed
Sun.

18.

ashem vohû...(3).

ahurânîsh ahurahe vahishtâbyô zaothrâbyô
sraêshtâbyô zaothrâbyô dahmô-pairi-
angharshtâbyô zaothrâbyô

[ashem vohû....
]

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd...) atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!

19.

([rôzh nek nãm rôzh pâk nãm
rôzh mubârak] rôzh i

(name the day of the month)
,
mâh i
(name the month)
,
gâh i
(name the Gah)
,
namâzh i dâdâr i
gêhã dãmã,)

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomi ashem,

ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât, hvarshêt i amarg i rayômañd
i aurvañd asp [bê rasat]

amâwañd pêrôzhgar amâwañdî
pêrôzhgarî dât dîn i vahe i mâzdayasnã
âgâhî rawâî vâfrîñgânî
bât, haft keshwar zamî êduñ bât,

>>men ânô âwâyat shudan <<(3).)

ashem vohû....

(Recite facing South:)

(dâdâr i gêhã dîn i mâzdayasnî
dât i zarathushtrî.)

nemase-tê ashâum sevishte aredvî sûre
anâhite ashaone, ashem vohû....

nemô urvaire vanguhi mazdadhâte ashaone, ashem vohû....

hvarexshaêtem ameshem raêm aurvat-aspem ýazamaide,
ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât, hvarshêt i amarg i rayômañd
i aurvat asp bê rasât.)

ashem vohû...!!

18.

(Whoso sacrifices to) the Ahuranis (Ladies) of Ahura with
most excellent libation, with fairest libations, with libations
filtered by the pious man, (give) to that man radiance ... as
I bless.

A thousand ... ten thousand of the healing remedies.

Come to me for help, O Mazda! ... of the Time of Long Duration.

(Paz.) The reward of merit ... as I bless.

19.

Homage to the creator of the creatures of the world, on the
day (N.) of good name, of holy name, of auspicious name, of the
month (N.) of auspicious name, of the gah (N.).

Propitiation ... I praise Asha.

May there be an increase in the luster and glory of the immortal,
radiant, swift-horsed Sun, the courageous, victorious in courage
and victory. May the knowledge, promulgation, and glory of the
good Mazdayasnian Law and Religion be in the seven regions of
the earth. So be it. I must go thither (i.e. the next world).

(Homage) to the Creator of the world, to the Mazdayasnian Religion,
the Law of Zartusht. Homage to you, O righteous Ardvisura Anahita,
most profitable, righteous one.

Homage to you, good Tree, righteous one, created by Ormazd!

We sacrifice to the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun.

(Hither) may reach the immortal, radiant, swift-horsed Sun.

6. L9,25,18 (sec. m.), P13, K12, append; deest F1, Pt1, Mf3,
L11 (but in this a space is left).

7. GjM, GKE insert, which is wanting in the Mss.

Mihr Niyayesh (Litany to Mithra)

0.

(pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
i awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât, mihir
i frâgayôt i dâwar i râst [bê rasat],

ezh hamâ gunâh patit pashêmãnôm,
ezh haravistîn dushmat duzhûxt duzhvaresht men pa
gêthî minît vaem guft vaem kard vaem jast vaem
bun bût estet ezh ã gunâhihâ manishnî
gaweshnî kunishnî tanî rvãnî gêthî
mainyuãnî ôxe awaxsh pashêmã pa
se gaweshnî pa patit hôm!)

1-9.

nemase-tê ahura mazda ... jasa mê avanghe
mazda,

ashaunãm vanguhîsh sûrå speñtå
fravashayô ýazamaide mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm
ýazamaide.

ashem vohû...(3).

0.

In the name of God. May the majesty and glory of Ohrmazd, the
beneficent lord, increase. (Hither) may come Mithra of wide cattle pastures,
the true judge. Of all sins ... I repent.

1-9.

Homage to you, O Ahura Mazda ... come to my help, O Mazda. We
sacrifice to the good, helpful, holy Fravashis of the righteous. We sacrifice
to Mithra of wide cattle pastures.

NOTES:

8. Parr. 1-9 = Ny1.1-9; desunt Mf3, K36, J9. For the last sentence
Geldner has "hvarexshaêtem ameshem raêm aurvat-aspem
ýazamaide", but see Kanga & Sontakke, 1962, II,
p. 304, also Dhalla, p. 66, and Sethna, p. 56.

10.

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

mithrahe vouru-gaoyaoitôish hazangra-gaoshahe baêvare-
cashmanô aoxtô-nâmanô ýazatahe
râmanô hvâstrahe xshnaothra ýasnâica
vahmâica xshnaothrâica frasastayaêca.

ýathâ ahû vairyô zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê,

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca frâ ashava vîdhvå
mraotû.

11.

mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm ýazamaide

arsh-vacanghem vyâxanem

hazangra-gaoshem hutâshtem

baêvare-cashmanem berezañtem

perethu-vaêdhayanem sûrem

ahvafnem jakhâurvånghem, mithrem aiwi-dah'yûm
ýazamaide, mithrem añtare-dah'yûm ýazamaide,
mithrem âdah'yûm ýazamaide, mithrem upairi-dah'yûm
ýazamaide, mithrem adhairi-dah'yûm ýazamaide,
mithrem pairi-dah'yûm ýazamaide, mithrem aipi-dah'yûm
ýazamaide.

12.

mithrem ahura berezañta

aithyajangha ashavana ýazamaide,

strêushca månghemca hvareca

urvarå paiti baresmanyå

mithrem vîspanãm dah'yunãm

dainghu-paitîm ýazamaide.

13.

ahe raya hvarenanghaca

tem ýazâi surunvata ýasna mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm
zaothrâbyô, mithrem vouru- gaoyaoitîm ýazamaide
râma-shayanem hushayanem airyâbyô dainghubyô.

14.

âca-nô jamyât avanghe

âca-nô jamyât ravanghe

âca-nô jamyât rafnanghe

âca-nô jamyât marzhdikâi

âca-nô jamyât baêshazâi

âca-nô jamyât verethrakhnâi

âca-nô jamyât havanghâi

âca-nô jamyât ashavastâi

ukhrô aiwithûrô ýasnyô

vahmyô anaiwidruxtô

vîspemâi anguhe astvaite

mithrô ýô vouru-gaoyaoitish.

15.

tem amavañtem ýazatem

sûrem dâmôhu sevishtem

mithrem ýazâi zaothrâbyô,

tem pairi-jasâi vañtaca nemanghaca

tem ýazâi surunvata ýasna mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm
zaothrâbyô, mithrem vouru- gaoyaoitîm ýazamaide

haomayô gava baresmana

hizvô danghangha mãthraca

vacaca shyaothnaca zaothrâbyasca

arshuxdhaêibyasca vâkhzhibyô.

ýenghê
hâtãm âat ýesnê paitî vanghô
mazdå ahurô vaêthâ ashât hacâ
ýånghãmcâ tãscâ tåscâ
ýazamaide.

10.

I proclaim ... of the Ahurian Faith.

(Gah according to the period of the day.)

Propitiation ... glorification to Mithra of wide cattle pastures, who has a
thousand ears, who has ten thousand eyes, the Yazad who is invoked by name,
(and) to Rama Khvastra. As (he is) the Lord that is to be chosen ... let one
who knows it pronounce it to me.

11.
We sacrifice to Mithra of wide cattle pastures, whose word is true
... the ever wakeful. We sacrifice to Mithra, who is around the country. We
sacrifice to Mithra, who is within the country. We sacrifice to Mithra, who
is in the country. We sacrifice to Mithra, who is above the country. We
sacrifice to Mithra, who is under the country. We sacrifice to Mithra, who is
before the country. We sacrifice to Mithra, who is behind the country.

12.
We sacrifice to Mithra and Ahura, the exalted, imperishable,
righteous ones, and the Stars, the Moon, and the Sun, by means of trees
yielding Barsom. We sacrifice to Mitha, the Lord of all countries.

13.
For his splendor and fortune I shall sacrifice to him with audible
worship, Mithra of wide cattle pastures with libations. We sacrifice to
Mithra of wide cattle pastures, who gives an abode of joy, and a good abode to
the Aryan countries.

14.
May he come hither to us in order to help
(us). May he come hither to us for spaciousness. May he come hither to us to
support (us). May he come hither to us to (grant us) mercy. May he come
hither to us to cure (us of disease). May he come hither to us so that we are
able to defeat our enemies. May he come hither to us to (grant us) a good
life. May he come hither to us to grant us possession of Truth. (May)
strong, unshakable, undeceivable Mithra of wide pastures, who is worthy of
worship and praise, (come hither) for the sake of the whole material world.

15.
This powerful strong god Mithra, strongest in the (world of)
creatures, I will worship with libations. I will cultivate him with praise
and reverence, worship him with audible prayer, with libations, Mithra of wide
cattle pastures.

We worship Mithra of wide cattle pastures with Haoma-containing milk and
baresman twigs, with skill of tongue and magic word, with speech and action
and libations, and with correctly uttered words.

We worship the male and female Entities in the worship of whom Ahura Mazda
knows (there is (or: consists) what is) best (lit. better) according to Asha.

16.
(Recite silently:)

(hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât.)

(Recite aloud:)

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi

mithrahe vouru-gaoyaoitôish hazangra-gaoshahe baêvare-
cashmanô aoxtô-nâmanô ýazatahe
râmanô hvâstrahe.

17.

ashem vohû....

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ...
(kerba mazhd...)

atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!

([rôzh nek nãm rôzh pâk nãm rôzh
mubârak] rôzh i
(name the day of the month)
,
mâh i
(name the month)
,
gâh i
(name the Gah)
,
namâzh i dâdâr i gêhã
dãmã,)

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomi ashem, ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât, mihir i frâgayôt
i dâwar i râst [bê rasat],

amâwañd pêrôzhgar amâwañdî
pêrôzhgarî dât dîn i vahe i mâzdayasnã
âgâhî rawâî vâfrîñgânî
bât, haft keshwar zamî êduñ bât,

>>men ânô âwâyat shudan <<(3).)

ashem vohû....

(Recite facing south:)
,

(dâdâr i gêhã dîn i mâzdayasnî
dât i zarathushtrî.)

nemase-tê ashâum sevishte aredvî sûre
anâhite ashaone,

ashem vohû....

nemô urvaire vanguhi mazdadhâte ashaone,

ashem vohû....

mithrem vouru-gaoyaoitîm ýazamaide.

ashem vohû....

(mihir i frâgayôt i dâwar i râst)

ashem vohû...!!

9. Geldner has 3.

Vispa Humata

vîspa humata vîspa hûxta vîspa
hvarshta baodhô-varshta, vîspa dushmata vîspa
duzhûxta vîspa duzhvarshta nôit baodhô-varshta.
vîspa humata vîspa hûxta vîspa hvarshta
vahishtem anghuîm ashaêta. vîspa dushmata vîspa
duzhûxta vîspa duzhvarshta acishtem anghuîm
ashaêta. vîspanãmca hûmatanãm
hûxtanãm hvarshtanãm vahishta anghuî
âat haca cithrem ashaone. ashem vohû....

All good thoughts, all good words, all good deeds I do willingly.
All evil thoughts, all evil words, all evil deeds I do unwillingly.
All good thoughts, all good words, all good deeds will reach Paradise.
All evil thoughts, all evil words, all evil deeds will reach Hell.
And all good thoughts, all good words, all good deeds are the
badge of the Ashavans for Paradise. Ashem Vohu....

This prayer is recited after Ny2 and only in Hawan gah. It is also said to help make pleasant dreams come true, and keep evil dreams from coming true.
(Kotwal & Hintze,
The Khorda Avesta and Yasht Codex E1,
Wiesbaden, 2008, p. 28.)

Nam Stayishn

1.

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå,

ashem vohû....

pa nãm i ýazad i baxshâyañdêh
i baxshâyashgar i meherbãn,

nãm setâyashne ôi hôrmazd hamâ
bût u hamâ hast u hamâ bêt.

nãm i ýazad i spinâ-mînô añdar-ac
mînôyãn mînô awash hvût-ash
ýak nãm hôrmazd-ac hvôdây mahêst
u tavânâ u dânâ u dâdâr u
parvartâr u pânâ u hvâvar u kerfehgar
u awaxshîdâr u awizhe vêh-dâtastãnî
u hamâzôr!

1.

With propitiation of Ahura Mazda. Ashem Vohu....

Praise be to the name of Him Who always was, always is and
always will be. (He is), by name, the Yazad Spena Menoi. Even
among the spiritual (yazads). He is Menoi (i.e. an invisible spirit).
One of His own names is also Ohrmazd. (He is) the greatest Lord,
powerful and wise, creator, nourisher, protector, compassionate,
virtuous, forgiver, pure, a good dispenser of justice and all
powerful.

NOTES:

10. Translation by B. N. Dhabhar,
Translation of Zand-i Khurtak
Avistak
, Bombay, 1963, pp. 44 ff.

2.

sipâs ôi vazôrg ôstîkân
ke âfrît avanît u pa-hvêsh anhambatîk
zôr u dânâî awartar shash amshâspañdãn
avad vêh ýazdãn u rôshan vahêsht
u garôthmãn u girt i âsmãn u gar i tâwâ
u mâh i bãmî u star i vash-tôxme u vât
u añdar-vâe u âw u âtash u zamîn
u urvar u gôspañd u ayôxshast u mardûm.

3.

ýazashn u nyâyashn ezh ôi hvâdâý
kerfehgar ke mêh kart ezh har getîhâ dahishnãn
mardûm pa gavâkî mâdãn dât
u sheharyârî i hañgãm u râînîdârî
i dâmãn pa raxma u ayôzishn u parîre
i devãn.

4.

namâz ôi vîspa-âgâh ash-hvâwar
kêsh frêstît ýasht-frôhar i zartôsht
i spitamãn ashti ô dâmãn dîn dânashn
u varôishn i âsna-hviradî u gushô-srûtê-
hviradî dânâyî i râînîdârî
i vîspa hastãn u bûdãn u bêdãn
frahañgân frahañg mãthra-speñta
ku bêt ravãn pûl buxtâr i ezh duzhax
u vadârdâr ôi ãn i pahalûm axôãn
i ashôãn rôshan hubôi i hamâ-hvârî.

5.

pa framân i tô hvâwar padîram u mînam
u gôyam u varzam dîn i awîzhe u astavãn-hôm
pa har kerfeh u awâxsham ezh vîsp baje u awîzhe
dâram h'ûdash âsnîde kunashne u parhîzashnei
pâk shash zôrân i jãn manashne gavashne
u kunashne u vîr u hôsh u hvirad.

6.

pa kãm i tô kerfehgar tavãn sâmânîhâ
kunam ãn i tô parastashne pa vêh-manashne vêh-gavashne
vêh-kunashne ku vashâyam râh i rôshan
ku ôm na rasad gêrãn pazdi rôzhax u vadîram
pa cayãn-vadarg u rasam ô ãn mãn i
vahêsht i pûr-bôi harvasp-pêsîde
u hamâ-hvârî.

2.

Thanks be to that Great Architect who, with His own unrivaled
strength and wisdom, created the sublime world, the six Amahraspands
of higher rank, many wonderful Yazads, the bright paradise Garothman,
the revolution of the sky, the shining sun, the brilliant moon,
stars of different germs, the wind, atmosphere, water, fire, the
earth, trees, beneficent cattle, the metals and mankind.

3.

Adoration and praise be to the righteous Lord Who made man
the greatest of all earthly creatures and through (the gift of)
speech and the power of reasoning, created them for the sovereignty
of the times and for the management of the creatures through the
contest in battles against the daevas.

4.

Homage to the Omniscient One, to him who is compassionate,
who, through Zartosht Spitaman of holy farohar, sent for the creatures
the apostleship (of religion), the knowledge of and the trustworthiness
with regard to, the Religion, innate wisdom and wisdom acquired
through the ears, and the instruction of, and guidance for all
who are, were, and will be, and the science of sciences, viz.,
the bountiful Manthra, so that the soul at the Chinwad bridge
may be released from hell, and may cause them to pass over the
Best Existence of the holy, the bright sweet-smelling, and all-beneficent.

5.

In obedience to your command, o compassionate one, I accept
your pure religion, and think, speak, and practice (in accordance
with it). I am steadfast on every meritorious deed and desist
from all sins. I keep pure my own personal conduct and completely
preserve the six powers of life, viz., first, thought, second,
word, third, deed, and again fourth, reasoning, fifth, memory,
and sixth, intellect.

6.

O righteous one, according to your will, I shall accomplish
to the extent of (my) power, your worship with good thoughts,
good words, and good deeds. I shall open (for myself) the brilliant
way (of paradise) so that the grievous punishment of hell may
not be inflicted on me. I shall pass over the Chinwad bridge and
attain to the abode of paradise (which is) very fragrant, all-embroidered,
and of all happiness.

7.

setâyashne ôi awaxshîdâr hvôdây
ke kãme kerfeh pâtadahishne kunañd fremãn-
râinîdârãn avadûm-ac bûjêt
darvañdãn-ac ezh dôzhax u avîzhagîhâ
vînâret vîspa dãm.

8.

setâishne i dâdâr hôrmazd i
harvasp-âgâh u tavânâ u tavañgar, haft
amshâspañd u bêhrãm ýazadi pîrôzgar
dushman-zadâr ama hutâshte bê rasât.

ashem vohû...(3).

7.

Praise be to the merciful Lord who bestows rewards for meritorious
deeds on those who obey his commands according to his will, and
at last will liberate even the wicked from (the torture of) hell
and will embellish with purity the whole creation.

8.

All praise to the creator Ohrmazd the omniscient, omnipotent,
and powerful, and to the seven Amahraspands, to the victorious
Yazad Warharan, the vanquisher of foes, and to the well-shapen
(Yazad) Ama (strength). (May all these) come (to my help).

11. The Irani
Khorda Avesta
prepared by Mobed Firouz Azargoshab
ends as follows: "ashaone, ashem vohû.... firuzbâd
xaruh avicah vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã (3). ashem
vohû...."

[Dhabhar continues with:]

[May the glory of the pure and good religion of the Mazdayasnians
be triumphant].

9.

Homage to these places and cities [these regions and districts],
[know that they are not specially mentioned], pasture lands [
i.e.
,
stalls of cattle are so called], houses [i.e., dwellings], drinking
places [i.e., fountains of water], to the waters, lands, and trees,
to this earth and the yonder sky, and even to the holy wind, to
the stars, the moon and the sun, and also to the self-sustained
eternal lights, [know that the self-sustainedness is this that
every one of them acts for itself] and to all creations of Spena
Menoi, males and females, [especially] the lords of holiness.

Ashem Vohu...(3).

Translation from
Denkard
, edited by Peshotun Dustoor
Behramjee Sunjana, 1876 English translation by Ratanshah E. Kohiyar

1.

(I) praise the name of that Minoyan mino, the increaser, worthy
to be praised, who always was, always is, and always will be;
whose one name is Ohrmazd, the God who is the greatest among all,
wise, Creator, supporter, protector, endurer, the lord of righteousness,
forgiver, and dispenser of excellent and pure justice.

2.

Thanks be to the exalted Lord of the world, who, of his own
power and wisdom, has created six Ameshaspands of high rank, numerous
Yazads, the shining paradise, Garothman, the surrounding heavens,
the hot sun, the shining moon, the numerous stars, the wind, the
atmosphere, the fire, the water, the earth, the trees, the cattle,
the metals, and mankind.

3.

Adoration and prayers to the righteous Lord who, for the purpose
of rule over people and to make people walk together to fight
against the Devs, has bestowed upon man speech and the power to
think, and (thus) made (him) superior to each created thing of
this world.

4.

(I) bow in the presence of the omniscient and caretaking Lord,
who has sent, through Zartosht Spitaman of the adorable farohar,
for the purpose rendering people friendly towards Him, the wisdom
of the religion, worthy of faith through natural intelligence
and knowledge of science -- wisdom that is the best for the guidance
of all persons who are, were and will be. That is, that (through
the wisdom of the religion) the soul is freed from the pains of
hell, and reaches into the shining, fragrant, ever-happy, (and)
the highest mansions of the pure.

5.

O (thou) Lord Protector! in obedience to thy command I am firm
in the pure religion and I promise to think and speak and do every
righteousness. Forgive me Thou (my) many sins; (may) I keep my
own conduct pure, and (may) I, in accordance with Thy wishes,
righteous Lord, keeping uncontaminated the six powers of the soul
-- work, speech, thought, reasoning, memory, and intellect --
(6) (and) in order to obtain the riches of the next world through
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, worship Thee, that
I may thus open (for myself the path to the shining paradise:
that is that the heavy punishment of hell may not be inflicted
upon me and I may, passing over the Chinwad bridge, reach into
the fragrant all-adorned and eternally happy mansions of paradise.

7.

(Praise be) to the Lord of gifts, who bestows upon those who
obey his commandments the reward of righteous wishes and who will
at the end liberate transgressors from hell and adorn the world
with purity.

Namaz-i chahar nemag

(ezh hamâ gunâh patit pashêmãnôm.)
ashem vohû....

>> nemô ånghãm asanghãmca shôithranãmca
gaoyaoitinãmca maêthananãmca avô-hvarenanãmca
apãmca zemãmca urvaranãmca ainghåsca
zemô avaingheca ashnô vâtaheca ashaonô
strãm månghô hûrô anakhranãm
raocanghãm hvadhâtanãm vîspanãmca
speñtahe mainyêush dâmanãm ashaonãm
ashaoninãmca ashahe rathwãm.

ashem vohû....<<(4)

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê
... (kerba mazhd...) atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû....

Of all sins I repent. Ashem Vohu....

(Recite once facing East, West, South, and North respectively:)

>> Homage to these places and these lands, and for these
pastures, and these abodes vith their hay-racks, and for the waters,
land, and plants, and for this earth and for yon heaven, and for
tbe Asha-owning wind, and for the stars, moon, and sun, and for
the eternal stars without beginning, and self-disposing, and for
all the Asha-owning creatures of Spenta Mainyu, male and female,
the regulators of Asha. Ashem Vohu.... (4)<<

Bestow on him riches

Ashem Vohu....

Mah Niyayesh (Litany to the Moon)

0.

(pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
i awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât, mâh
i buxtâr [mâh ýazat bê rasât],

ezh hamâ gunâh patit pashêmãnôm,
ezh haravistîn dushmat duzhûxt duzhvaresht men pa
gêthî minît vaem guft vaem kard vaem jast vaem
bun bût estet ezh ã gunâhihâ manishnî
gaweshnî kunishnî tanî rvãnî gêthî
mainyuãnî ôxe awaxsh pashêmã pa
se gaweshnî pa patit hôm!)

0.

In the name of God. May the majesty and glory of Ormazd, the
beneficent lord, increase. (Hither) may come the purifier Moon, the Yazad
Moon. Of all sins ... I repent.

NOTES:

1.

nemô ahurâi mazdâi nemô ameshaêibyô
speñtaêibyô nemô månghâi
gaocithrâi nemô paiti-dîtâi nemô
paiti-dîti (3).

1.

Homage to Ahura Mazda. Homage to the Amesha Spentas. Homage to the
Moon that has the seed of the Bull. Homage (to the Moon) when looked at.
Homage with the look.

12. According to Dastur N. D. Minochehr-Homji, MPG4, p. 138,
this verse should be recited with the head bowed.

2.

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomi ashem,

ashem vohû...(3).

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

månghahe gaocithrahe gêushca aêvô-dâtayå
gêushca pouru-saredhayå

xshnaothra ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca,

ýathâ ahû vairyô zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê,

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca frâ ashava vîdhvå
mraotû.

3.

nemô ahurâi mazdâi nemô ameshaêibyô
speñtaêibyô nemô månghâi
gaocithrâi nemô paiti-dîtâi nemô
paiti-dîti.

4.

kat må uxshyeiti kat må nerefsaiti, pañca-dasa
må uxshyeiti pañca-dasa må nerefsaiti, ýå
hê uxshyãstâtô tå nerefsãstâtô
tå nerefsãstâtô ýå hê
uxshyãstâtascit, kê ýâ må
uxshyeiti nerefsaiti thwat.

5.

månghem gaocithrem ashavanem ashahe ratûm ýazamaide,
tat månghem paiti-vaênem tat månghem paiti-vîsem
raoxshnem månghem aiwi-vaênem raoxshnem månghem
aiwi-vîsem, hishteñti ameshå speñta
hvarenô dârayeiñti hishteñti ameshå
speñta hvarenô baxsheñti zãm paiti
ahuradhâtãm.

2.

Propitiation to Ahura Mazda. ... I praise Asha. I proclaim ... of
Ahurian Faith.

(Gah according to the period of the day.)

Propitiation ...
glorification to the Moon that has the seed of the Bull. To the sole-created
Bull. To the Bull of many species. As (he is) the Lord that is to be chosen
... let one who knows it pronounce it to me.

3.
Homage to Ahura Mazda .... Homage with the look.

4.
How does the Moon wax? How does the Moon wane? Fifteen (days) does
the Moon wax. Fifteen days does the moon wane. As long as (is) her waxing,
so long the waning. So long (is) the waning, even as the waxing. Who (is it)
through whom the Moon waxes (and) wanes, (other) than you?

5.
We sacrifice to the Moon that has the seed of the Bull, the
righteous and master of Asha. Now I look at the Moon. Now I present myself
to the Moon. Now I behold the brilliant Moon. I present myself to the
brilliant Moon. There stand up the Amesha Spentas, they hold the glory.
There stand the Amesha Spentas, they bestow the glory on the earth created by
Ahura.

6.

âat ýat månghahe raoxshni
tâpayeiti
mishti urvaranãm zairi-gaonanãm zaramaêm paiti
zemâdha uzuxshyeiti, añtaremånghåsca
perenô-månghåsca vîshaptathåsca,
añtaremånghem ashavanem ashahe ratûm ýazamaide,
perenô-månghem ashavanem ashahe ratûm ýazamaide.
vîshaptathem ashavanem ashahe ratûm
ýazamaide.

6.
When the Moon warms with its light, then the golden-colored plants
always grow up together from the earth in the spring. (We sacrifice to) the
new-moon days, the full-moon days, and the intervening seventh day. We
sacrifice to the new-moon, the righteous, master of Asha. We sacrifice to the
full-moon, the righteous, master of Asha. We sacrifice to the intervening
day, the righteous, master of Asha.

13. So Kanga-Sontakke; Geld. has "månghem raoxshne".

7.

ýazâi månghem gaocithrem bakhem raêvañtem
hvarenanguhañtem afnanguhañtem tafnanguhañtem
varecanguhañtem xshtâvañtem îshtavañtem
ýaoxshtavañtem saokavañtem zairimyâvañtem
vohvâvañtem bakhem baêshazem.

8.

ahe raya hvarenanghaca

tem ýazâi surunvata ýasna

månghem gaocithrem zaothrâbyô, månghem
gaocithrem ashavanem ashahe ratûm ýazamaide haomayô
gava ... tåscâ ýazamaide.

(Recite silently:)

(hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât.)

(Recite aloud:)

9.

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi
månghahe gaocithrahe gêushca aêvô-dâtayå
gêushca pouru-saredhayå.

ashem vohû...(3)!

10.

dasta amem verethrakhnemca

dasta gêush hvâthrô-nahîm

dasta narãm pourutâtem

stâhyanãm vyâxananãm

vanatãm avanemnanãm

hathravanatãm hamerethê

hathravanatãm dush-mainyush

stê rapatãm cithravanghãm.

11.

ýazata pouru-hvarenangha

ýazata pouru-baêshaza

cithra vô buyâresh masânå

cithra vô zavanô-savô,

cithra bôit ýûzhemcit hvarenô

ýazemnâi âpô dâyata!

12.

ashem vohû....

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd) ... ashem vohû...!

([rôzh nek nãm rôzh pâk nãm rôzh
mubârak] rôzh i

(name the day of the month)
,
mâh i
(name the month)
,
gâh i
(name the Gah)
,
namâzh i dâdâr i gêhã
dãmã,)

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå,

nemô ahurâi ahurâi mazdâi nemô ameshaêibyô
speñtaêibyô nemô månghâi
gaocithrâi nemô paiti-dîtâi nemô
paiti-dîti.

ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât, mâh i buxtâr [mâh
ýazat bê rasât] amâwañd pêrôzhgar
amâwañdî pêrôzhgarî dât
dîn i vahe i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
rawâî vâfrîñgânî bât,
haft keshwar zamî êduñ bât,

>>men ânô âwâyat shudan <<(3).)

ashem vohû....

(Recite facing South:)

(dâdâr i gêhã dîn i mâzdayasnî
dât i zarathushtrî.)

nemase-tê ashâum sevishte aredvî sûre
anâhite ashaone,

ashem vohû.... nemô urvaire vanguhi mazdadhâte
ashaone,

ashem vohû.... månghem gaocithrem ashavanem ashahe
ratûm ýazamaide.

ashem vohû.... (gurz hvarahe awazâyât, mâh
i buxtâr [mâh ýazat] bê rasât.)

ashem vohû...!!

7.
I will sacrifice to the Moon that has the seed of the Bull, the
bestower, radiant, glorious, possessed of water, possessed of warmth,
possessed of knowledge, possessed of wealth, possessed of riches, possessed of
discernment, possessed of weal, possessed of verdure, possessed of good, the
bestower, the healing.

8.
For his splendor and fortune I shall sacrifice to him with audible
worship, the Moon that has the seed of the Bull, with libations.

We sacrifice to the Moon that has the seed of the Bull, the righteous,
master of Asha,

With Haoma-containing milk ... and with correctly uttered words.

We worship the male and female Entities in the worship of whom Ahura
Mazda knows (there is (or: consists) what is) best (lit. better) according to
Asha.

9.
Y.A.V.(2).
I desire worship ... of the Moon that has the seed of the Bull, of the sole-
created Bull, of cattle of all species. Ashem...(3).
10.
Give strength
and victory. Give a satisfactory supply of cattle. Give a multitude of men,
steadfast, belonging to the assembly, vanquishing, not vanquished, vanquishing
adversaries at one stroke, vanquishing enemies at one stroke, of manifest help
to the blessed.

11.
O Yazads full of fortune! O Yazads full of healing! Manifest by
your greatness, manifest be those of you who help when invoked. O waters give
indeed just your own manifest fortune to the worshiper.

Aban Niyayesh (Litany to the Waters)

0.

xshnaothra
ahurahe mazdå,
ashem vohû....

(pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
i awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât, [âvã]
arduî sûr bânô bê rasât,

ezh hamâ gunâh patit pashêmãnôm,
ezh haravistîn dushmat duzhûxt duzhvaresht men pa
gêthî minît vaem guft vaem kard vaem jast vaem
bun bût estet ezh ã gunâhihâ manishnî
gaweshnî kunishnî tanî rvãnî gêthî
mainyuãnî ôxe awaxsh pashêmã pa
se gaweshnî pa patit hôm!)

0.

In the name of God. May the majesty and glory of Ormazd, the
beneficent lord, increase. (Hither) may come Banu Aban Ardvisur.
Of all sins ... I repent.

NOTES:

14. This Niyayesh is only recited during Hawan, Rapithwin, or
Uzerin Gahs.

1.

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomi ashem, ashem vohû...(3).

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

apãm vanguhînãm mazdadhâtanãm
areduyå âpô anâhitayå ashaonyå
vîspanãmca apãm mazdadhâtanãm
vîspanãmca urvaranãm mazdadhâtanãm
xshnaothra ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca.

ýathâ ahû vairyô zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê,

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca frâ ashava vîdhvå
mraotû.

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(10).

2.

mraot ahurô mazdå spitamâi zarathushtrâi,
ýazaêsha-mê hîm spitama zarathushtra
ýãm aredvîm sûrãm anâhitãm

perethû-frâkãm baêshazyãm

vîdaêvãm ahurô-tkaêshãm

ýesnyãm anguhe astvaite

vahmyãm anguhe astvaite

âdhû-frâdhanãm ashaonîm

vãthwô-frâdhanãm ashaonîm

gaêthô-frâdhanãm ashaonîm

shaêtô-frâdhanãm ashaonîm

dainghu-frâdhanãm ashaonîm.

3.

ýâ vîspanãm arshnãm xshudrå
ýaozhdadhâiti

ýâ vîspanãm hâirishinãm

zãthâi garewãn ýaozhdadhâiti
ýâ vîspå hâirishîsh huzâmitô
dadhâiti

ýâ vîspanãm hâirishinãm

dâitîm rathwîm paêma ava-baraiti.

4.

masitãm dûrât frasrûtãm

ýâ asti avavaiti masô

ýatha vîspå imå âpô

ýå zemâ paiti frataciñti

ýâ amavaiti fratacaiti

hukairyât haca barezanghat

aoi zrayô vouru-kashem.

5.

ýaozeñti vîspe karanô

zrayâi vouru-kashaya

â-vîspô maidhyô ýaozaiti

ýat hîsh aoi fratacaiti

ýat hîsh aoi frazhgaraiti

aredvî sûra anâhita,

ýenghe hazangrem vairyanãm

hazangrem apakhzhâranãm,

kascitca aêshãm vairyanãm

kascitca aêshãm apakhzhâranãm

cathware-satem ayare-baranãm

hvaspâi naire baremnâi.

1.

To the good waters, created by Mazda. To the waters of Aredvi
Anahita, the righteous. To all waters created by Mazda. To all
plants created by Mazda. Propitiation ... glorification. As (he
is) the Lord that is to be chosen ... let one who knows it pronounce
it to me.

2.

Ahura Mazda spoke to Spitama Zarathushtra: 'May you sacrifice
for me, O Spitama Zarathushtra, to her who is Aredvi Sura Anahita,

The wide-expanding, the healing,

Foe to the daevas, of Ahura's Faith,

Worthy of sacrifice in the material world,

Worthy of prayer in the material world,

Life-increasing, the righteous,

Herd-increasing, the righteous,

Fold-increasing, the righteous,

Wealth-increasing, the righteous,

Country-increasing, the righteous.'

3.

Who purifies the seed of all males.

Who purifies the wombs of

All females for bearing. Who makes all females have easy childbirth.

Who bestows on all females

Right (and) timely milk.

4.

The great, far-famed,

Who is as much in greatness

As all these waters

That run along on this earth.

Who, the strong one, flows forth

From the height Hukairya

To the Sea Vourukasha.

5.

All the shores around the Sea Vourukasha

Are in commotion,

The whole middle is bubbling up

When she flows forth to them,

When she streams forth to them,

Aredvi Sura Anahita.

To whom belong a thousand lakes,

To whom a thousand outlets;

Anyone of these lakes

And any of these outlets

(Is) a forty days' ride

For a man mounted on a good horse.

6.

ainghåsca mê aêvanghå âpô

apakhzhârô vî-jasâiti vîspâish
aoi karshvãn ýâish hapta, ainghåsca
mê aêvanghå âpô

hamatha ava-baraiti

hãminemca zayanemca,

hâ-mê âpô ýaozhdadhâiti hâ
arshnãm xshudrå hâ xshathrinãm garewãn
hâ xshathrinãm paêma.

[â hâtãmca ... haithyâvareshtãm
hyat vasnâ ferashôtemem.]

6.

And the outflow of this

One water of mine penetrates to all the seven zones. And (the
outflow) of this one water of mine

Flows continuously

Both summer and winter.

She purifies my waters, she (purifies) the seed of males, the
wombs of females, the milk of females.

15. According to the Guj, Kh. Av. Y65.6-14 may optionally be recited
here.

7.

ýãm azem ýô ahurô mazdå
hizvârena uzbaire fradathâi nmânaheca vîsaheca
zañtêushca dainghêushca.

8.

ýâ ahmât staota ýasnya srâvayeni
ahunemca vairîm srâvayeni ashemca vahishtem husravâni
apasca vanguhîsh ýaozhdathâne hathra ana gâthwya
vaca,

garô nmâne ahurô mazdå jasat paoiryô,
dathat ahmât tat avat âyaptem.

9.

ahe raya hvarenanghaca

tãm ýazâi surunvata ýasna

tãm ýazâi huyashta ýasna ana buyå
zavanô-sâsta ana buyå huyashtara, aredvîm
sûrãm anâhitãm ashaonîm zaothrâbyô
aredvîm sûrãm anâhitãm ashaonîm
ashahe ratûm ýazamaide

haomayô gava baresmana

hizvô danghangha mãthraca

vacaca shyaothnaca zaothrâbyasca

arshuxdhaêibyasca vâkhzhibyô. ýenghê
hâtãm âat ýesnê paitî vanghô
mazdå ahurô vaêthâ ashât hacâ
ýånghãmcâ tãscâ tåscâ
ýazamaide.

7.

Whom I, Ahura Mazda by movement of tongue (?) brought forth
for the furtherance of the house, village, town, and country.

8.

Inasmuch as I shall henceforth recite the Staota Yasna, and
shall recite the Ahuna Vairya, and shall pour forth (?) the Asha
Vahishta, and shall purify the good waters with (lit. together
with) that Gathic word 'Ahura Mazda attained first in the Abode
of Praise' - she will therefore give me reward.

9.

For her splendor and fortune I shall sacrifice to her with
audible worship, I shall sacrifice to her with the well-sacrificed
worship. Through this may you be commanded when invoked! Through
this may you be more than well-sacrificed! (We sacrifice) to Aredvi
Sura Anahita, the righteous, with libations. We sacrifice to Aredvi
Sura Anahita, the righteous, master of Asha,

With Haoma-containing milk ... and with correctly uttered words.

We worship the male and female Entities in the worship of whom
Ahura Mazda knows (there is (or: consists) what is) best (lit.
better) according to Asha.

10.
(Recite silently:)

(hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât.)

(Recite aloud:)

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi
apãm vanguhînãm mazdadhâtanãm
areduyå âpô anâhitayå ashaonyå
vîspanãmca apãm mazdadhâtanãm
vîspanãmca urvaranãm mazdadhâtanãm.

ashem vohû....

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd) atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!

16. Gld: (3).

11.

([rôzh nek nãm rôzh pâk nãm
rôzh mubârak]
rôzh i
(name the day of the month)
,
mâh i
(name the month)
,
gâh i
(name the Gah)
,
namâzh i dâdâr i
gêhã dãmã,)

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomi ashem, ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât, [âvã] arduî
sûr bânô [bê rasât], amâwañd
pêrôzhgar amâwañdî pêrôzhgarî
dât dîn i vahe i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
rawâî vâfrîñgânî bât,
haft keshwar zamî êduñ bât,

>>men ânô âwâyat shudan <<(3).)

ashem vohû....

(Recite facing South:)

(dâdâr i gêhã dîn i mâzdayasnî
dât i zarathushtrî.) nemase-tê ashâum
sevishte aredvî sûre anâhite ashaone,

ashem vohû....

nemô urvaire vanguhi mazdadhâte ashaone,

ashem vohû....

aredvîm sûrãm anâhitãm ashaonîm
ashahe ratûm ýazamaide.

ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât, [âvã] arduî
sûr bânô bê rasât,)

ashem vohû...!!

Atash Niyayesh (Litany to the Fire)

NOTES:

0.

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, nemase tê âtarsh
mazdå ahurahe hudhå mazishta ýazata,

ashem vohû....

(pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
i awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât,

(If praying at an Atash Behram, recite:)

âtarsh i behrâm âdar i frâ,

(If praying at an Adaran, recite:)

âtarsh i âdarãn âdar i frâ,

(If praying at an Atash Dadgah, recite:)

âtarsh i dâdgâh âdar i frâ,

ezh hamâ gunâh patit pashêmãnôm,
ezh haravistîn dushmat duzhûxt duzhvaresht men pa
gêthî minît vaem guft vaem kard vaem jast vaem
bun bût estet ezh ã gunâhihâ manishnî
gaweshnî kunishnî tanî rvãnî gêthî
mainyuãnî ôxe awaxsh pashêmã pa
se gaweshnî pa patit hôm!)

0.

With propitiation
of Ahura Mazda. Homage to you, O Fire of
Ahura Mazda, O good created, great Yazata.

Ashem Vohu.... In the name of God. May the majesty and glory of
Ormazd, the beneficent Lord, increase.

(Note: If praying at an Atash Bahram, recite:)

To the Fire Behram, the great Fire.

(Note: If praying at an Atash Adaran, recite:)

To the Fire Adaran, the great Fire.

(Note: If praying at an Atash Dadgah, recite:)

To the Fire Dadgah, the great Fire.

Of all sins ... I repent.

17. Translation follows M. N. Dhalla,
The Nyaishes or Zoroastrian
Litanies,
pp. 134-185, except as noted. This first sentence is
omitted by Dhalla. Dhalla translates "yazata" as "angel".

1.

us-môi uzâreshvâ ahurâ ârmaitî
tevîshîm dasvâ

spênishtâ mainyû mazdâ vanghuyâ
zavô âdâ

ashâ hazô êmavat vohû mananghâ feseratûm.

2.

rafedhrâi vourucashânê dôishî-môi
ýâ-vê abifrâ

tâ xshathrahyâ ahurâ ýâ vanghêush
ashish mananghô

frô speñtâ ârmaitê ashâ daênå
fradaxshayâ.

3.

at râtãm zarathushtrô tanvascît hvah'yå
ushtanem

dadâitî paurvatâtem mananghascâ vanghêush
mazdâi

shyaothanahyâ ashâi ýâcâ uxdhah'yâcâ
seraoshem xshathremcâ.

4.

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, nemase tê âtarsh
mazdå ahurahe hudhå mazishta ýazata,

ashem vohû...(3).

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô,

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication)

âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra tava âtarsh
puthra ahurahe mazdå,

5.

âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra hvarenanghô
savanghô mazdadhâtahe airyanãm hvarenô
mazdadhâtanãm kâvayeheca hvarenanghô
mazdadhâtahe âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra
kavôish haosravanghahe varôish haosravanghahe asnvañtahe
garôish mazdadhâtahe caêcistahe varôish
mazdadhâtahe kâvayeheca hvarenanghô mazdadhâtahe.

6.

âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra, raêvañtahe
garôish mazdadhâtahe kâvayeheca hvarenanghô
mazdadhâtahe âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra,
âtarsh speñta rathaêshtâra ýazata
pouru-hvarenangha ýazata pouru-baêshaza, âthrô
ahurahe mazdå puthra, mat vîspaêibyô âterebyô
xshathrô-nafedhrô nairyô-sanghahe ýazatahe
xshnaothra ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca.

ýathâ ahû vairyô, zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca, frâ ashava
vîdhvå mraotû.

7.

ýasnemca vahmemca huberetîmca ushta-beretîmca
vañta-beretîmca âfrînâmi tava âtarsh
puthra ahurahe mazdå,

ýesnyô ahi vahmyô

ýesnyô buyå vahmyô

nmânâhu mashyâkanãm,

ushta buyât ahmâi naire

ýase-thwâ bâdha frâyazâite

aêsmô-zastô baresmô-zastô

gao-zastô hâvanô-zastô.

8.

dâityô-aêsmi-buyå dâityô-baoidhi-
buyå dâityô-pithwi-buyå dâityô-upasayeni-
buyå perenâyush-harethri-buyå dahmâyush-harethri-
buyå âtarsh puthra ahurahe mazdå.

9.

saoci-buye ahmya nmâne mat-saoci-buye ahmya nmâne
raocahi-buye ahmya nmâne vaxshathi-buye ahmya nmâne
darekhemcit aipi zrvânem upa sûrãm frashô-keretîm
hadha sûrayå vanghuyå frashô-keretôit.

10.

dâyå mê âtarsh puthra ahurahe mazdå,

âsu hvâthrem âsu thrâitîm

âsu jîtîm pouru hvâthrem

pouru thrâitîm pouru jîtîm mastîm
spânô xshviwrem hizvãm urune ushi

xratûm pascaêta masitem

mazåñtem apairi-âthrem.

nairyãm pascaêta hãm-vareitîm

11.

eredhwô-zeñgãm ahvafnyãm

thrishûm asnãmca xshafnãmca

âsitô-gâtûm jakhâurûm

tuthrushãm âsnãm frazañtîm

karshô-râzãm vyâxanãm hãm-raodhãm
hvâpãm ãzô-bûjim hvîrãm
ýâ-mê frâdhayât nmânemca
vîsemca zañtûmca dah'yûmca dainghusastîmca.

12.

dâyå mê âtarsh puthra ahurahe mazdå

ýâ mê anghat afrasånghå

nûremca ýavaêca-tâite

vahishtem ahûm ashaonãm

raocanghem vîspô-hvâthrem zaze-buye vanghâuca
mizhde vanghâuca sravahi urunaêca darekhe havanghe!

13.

vîspaêibyô sastîm baraiti

âtarsh mazdå ahurahe

ýaêibyô aêm hãm-pacâite

xshâfnîmca sûirîmca,

vîspaêibyô haca izyeite

huberetîm ushtâ-beretîmca

vañtâ-beretîmca spitama.

14.

vîspanãm para-careñtãm

âtarsh zasta âdidhaya,

cîm haxa hashê baraitî

fracarethwå armaêshâidhe.

âtarem speñtem ýazamaide

taxmem hañtem rathaêshtârem.

15.

âat ýezi-shê aêm baraiti aêsmem
vâ ashaya beretem baresma vâ ashaya frastaretem urvarãm
vâ hadhânaêpatãm

â-hê pascaêta frînaiti

xshnûtô atbishtô hakhdhanghum,

16.

upa-thwâ haxshôit gêush vãthwa

upa vîranãm pourutâs

upa-thwâ verezvatca manô

verezvatica haxshôit anguha

urvâxshangha gaya jikhaêsha

tå xshapanô ýå jvâhî,

imat âthrô âfrivanem

ýô ahmâi aêsmem baraiti

hikûsh raocas-pairîshtã

ashahe bereja ýaozhdâtã.

17.
(Recite silently:)

(hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât.)

(Recite aloud:)

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi
âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra tava âtarsh
puthra ahurahe mazdå âthrô ahurahe mazdå
puthra hvarenanghô savanghô mazdadhâtahe airyanãm
hvarenô mazdadhâtanãm kâvayeheca hvarenanghô
mazdadhâtahe

âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra kavôish haosravanghahe
varôish haosravanghahe asnvañtahe garôish mazdadhâtahe
caêcistahe varôish mazdadhâtahe kâvayeheca
hvarenanghô mazdadhâtahe.

âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra raêvañtahe
garôish mazdadhâtahe kâvayeheca hvarenanghô
mazdadhâtahe âthrô ahurahe mazdå puthra
âtarsh speñta rathaêshtâra ýazata
pouru-hvarenangha ýazata pouru-baêshaza, âthrô
ahurahe mazdå puthra mat vîspaêibyô âterebyô
xshathrô-nafedhrô nairyô-sanghahe ýazatahe.

ashem vohû...(3).

18.

at tôi âtrêm ahurâ aojônghvañtem
ashâ usêmahî

asîshtîm êmavañtem stôi rapañtê
cithrâ-avanghem

at mazdâ daibishyañtê zastâishtâish
dereshtâ-aênanghem.

ashem vohû....

19.

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd...) atha jamyât ýatha âfrînâmi.

ashem vohû...!

20.

([rôzh nek nãm rôzh pâk nãm
rôzh mubârak]
rôzh i
(name the day of the month),

mâh i
(name the month)
,
gâh i
(name the Gah)
,
namâzh i dâdâr i
gêhã dãmã,)

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå.

nemase tê âtarsh mazdå ahurahe hudhå mazishta
ýazata.

ashem vohû....

(gurz hvarahe awazâyât,

(If praying at an Atash Behram, recite:)

âtarsh i behrâm âdar i frâ,

(If praying at an Adaran, recite:)

âtarsh i âdarãn âdar i frâ,

(If praying at an Atash Dadgah, recite:)

âtarsh i dâdgâh âdar i frâ,

1.

Arise unto me, O Ahura! give vigor through Armaiti, Strength
by the good reward through Thy Holy Spirit, O Mazda! Mighty power
through Asha, supremacy through Vohu Manah.

2.

For my support, O Far-seeing One, may Ye manifest unto me
those incomparable things

Of your Khshathra, O Ahura, which are the reward of Vohu Manah;

Instruct our consciences, O Holy Armaiti, through Asha.

3.

So Zarathushtra gives as an offering even the life of his
body,

And the excellence of Vohu Manah unto Mazda,

As also obedience and power of deed and word unto Asha.

4.

Propitiation unto Ahura Mazda. Homage unto thee, O Fire of
Ahura Mazda, thou good-created, great Yazata.

Ashem Vohu...(3).

I profess myself a Mazda-worshipper, a follower of Zarathushtra,
opposing the Daevas, accepting the Ahuric doctrine.

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

Unto Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda. Unto thee, O Fire, son of Ahura
Mazda.

5.

To Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda; to the good fortune and Prosperity,
created by Mazda; to the Aryan good fortune, created by Mazda;
to the kingly good fortune, created by Mazda; to Fire, the son
of Ahura Mazda; to Kavi Husravah, to the Lake of Husravah; to
Mount Asnavant, created by Mazda; to Lake Chaechista, created
by Mazda; to the kingly good fortune, created by Mazda.

6.

To Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda; to Mount Raevant, created
by Mazda, to the kingly good fortune, created by Mazda; to Fire,
the son of Ahura Mazda; O Fire! holy warrior, O Yazata full of
fortune, O Yazata full of healing; to Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda,
with all fires; to the Yazata Nairyosangha, offspring of sovereignty
(Khshathra). Propitiation for worship, adoration, propitiation,
and praise.

'Yatha Ahu Vairyo', the zaotar should say to me

'Atha ratush ashatchit hacha', the Ashavan, knowing one should
say.

7.

I bless in reverence and adoration the abiding offering, the
joyous offering, and the devotional offering (offered) to you,
O Fire! son of Ahura Mazda.

Worthy of sacrifice you are, worthy of prayer,

worthy of sacrifice may you always be, worthy of prayer,

in the dwellings of men.

May there be hope to that man who verily shall sacrifice to you

with fuel in his hand, with the Baresma in his hand,

with milk in his hand, with the mortar in his hand.

8.

May you be provided with proper fuel! May you be provided
with proper incense! May you be provided with proper nourishment!
May you be provided with proper upkeep! May you be maintained
by one of full age! May you be maintained by one wise (in religion),
O Fire, son of Ahura Mazda.

9.

In order to be burning in this house, in order to be ever
burning in this house, in order to be blazing in this house, in
order to be increasing in this house,

Even throughout the Long Time,

until the mighty Renovation, including the mighty, good Renovation.

10.

Give me, O Fire, son of Ahura Mazda! well-being immediately,
sustenance immediately; life immediately, well-being in abundance;
sustenance in abundance, life in abundance; knowledge, holiness,
a ready tongue, understanding for (my) soul; and afterwards wisdom
(which is) comprehensive, great, imperishable.

11.

(Give me) then the manly valor, which is ever afoot, sleepless,
(for one third of the days and nights), watchful while lying in
bed. (Give me) native offspring that give support, ruling over
the region, belonging to the assembly, thoroughly developed, possessed
of good works, delivering from distress, of good intellect, that
may further my house, village, town, country, (and) the renown
of the country.

12.

Give me, O Fire, son of Ahura Mazda, the Best
World of the righteous, the shining, the all-happy, so that it
may fulfill my wish, now and for ever, so as to attain to good
reward, and to good renown, and to long happiness of my soul!

13.

The Fire of Ahura Mazda

Gives command to all

For whom he cooks

The night and the morning meals.

From all he solicits

A good offering, and a wished-for offering,

And a devotional offering, O Spitama!

14.

The Fire looks at the hands of all passers-by - 'what does
the friend bring to the friend, the one that goes forth to the
one that sits still?' We sacrifice unto the holy Fire, the bold,
good warrior.

15.

Then if that one brings unto him either fuel righly brought,
or Baresma rightly spread, or the plant Hadhanaepata, to him thereupon,
in fulfillment of his wish, the Fire of Ahura Mazda, propitiated,
unoffended, gives a blessing:

16.

'May a herd of cattle attend you,

A multitude of men to you,

And may an active mind

And an active spirit attend you.

May you live with a joyous life

The nights which you live!'

This is the Fire's blessing (on him)

Who brings him fuel,

Dry, exposed to the light,

Purified in accordance with the ritual of Asha.

17.
(Recite silently:)

Ormazd the Lord! the increaser of mankind, of the species
of mankind, of all species, and of all good ones! May he cause
intelligence, steadfastness, and goodness, unto me (who am) one
of the good Mazdayasnians. So be it!

(Recite aloud:)

Yatha Ahu Vairyo...(2).

I desire worship and adoration and strength and force for Fire,
son of Ahura Mazda. For Fire, son of Ahura Mazda, to the good
fortune and prosperity, created by Mazda, to the Aryan good fortune,
created by Mazda; to the kingly good fortune, created by Mazda;
to Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda; to Kavi Husravah; to the Lake
of Husravah, to Mount Asnavant, created by Mazda; to Lake Chaechista,
created by Mazda; to the kingly good fortune, created by Mazda.
To Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda; to Mount Raevant, created by
Mazda; to the kingly good fortune, created by Mazda; to Fire,
the son of Ahura Mazda; O Fire! holy warrior, O Yazata full of
fortune, O Yazata full of healing; to Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda,
with all fires; to the Yazata Nairyosangha, offspring of sovereignty
(Khshathra).

Ashem Vohu...(3).

18.

Then through Asha, O Ahura! we wish your mighty and powerful
Fire, which is taught through Asha, to be a manifest help to the
ally, but a visible harm at your beck, O Mazda! to the foe.

Ashem Vohu....

19.

Bestow on him riches...

20.

Homage to the creator of the creatures of the world, on the
day (name the day) of good name, of holy name, of auspicious name,
on the month (name the month) of auspicious name, of the Gah (name
the Gah). With propitiation of Ahura Mazda. Homage to you, O Fire
of Ahura Mazda, O good created, great Yazata.

Ashem Vohu....

May there be an increase in the luster and fortune .

(Note: If praying at an Atash Bahram, recite:)

To the Fire Behram, the great Fire.

(Note: If praying at an Atash Adaran, recite:)

To the Fire Adaran, the great Fire.

(Note: If praying at an Atash Dadgah, recite:)

To the Fire Dadgah, the great Fire.

âdarã shâh i pêrôzhgar âdar
i gushasp âdar i hvardât âdar i burzhîn
mihir awarê âdarã u âtarshã ke
pa dâtgâh nishâst esteñd gurz hvarahe
awazâyât mainyô karkô
amâwañd
pêrôzhgar amâwañdî pêrôzhgarî
dât dîn i vahe i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
rawâî vâfrîñgânî dât.

haft keshwar zamî êduñ bât,

>> men ânô âwâyat shudan <<(3).)

ashem vohû....

(Recite facing South:)

(dâdâr i gêhã dîn i mâzdayasnî
dât i zarathushtrî.)

nemase tê ashâum sevishte aredvî sûre
anâhite ashaone, ashem vohû....

nemô urvaite vanguhi mazdadhâte ashaone, ashem vohû....

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå,

nemase tê âtarsh mazdå ahurahe hudhå mazishta
ýazata.

ashem vohû...!!!

May the powerful and victorious fires - Adar Gushasp, Adar Khordad
and Adar Burzin Meher and other Adaran and Atashan which are established
in their proper places (dad-gah) be on the increase. May the greatness
and brightness of Menoi Karko which is powerful and victorious
be on the increase. May these be on the increase - these fires
which possess power and victory. May the knowledge, promulgation,
and glory of the Mazdayasnian law and religion be in the seven
regions of the earth! So be it!

I must go thither (3).

Ashem Vohu....

(Recite facing south:)

To the creator of the world, to the Mazdayasnian religion,
the Law of Zarthusht. Homage to you! O righteous Ardvisura Anahita,
most profitable, O righteous one.

Ashem Vohu....

Homage to you, O good tree, righteous, created by Mazda.

Ashem Vohu....

With propitiation of Ahura Mazda. Homage to you, O Fire of Ahura
Mazda, O good created, great Yazata.

Ashem Vohu....

18. Gld reads "kardo," but see Kanga-Sontakke,
Avestâ -- the Sacred Scripture
of the Parsees,
(Poona, 1962, 324,)
K.E. Kanga,
Khordeh Avesta
(Bombay, 1880, p. 85)
and other versions.

niyayeshes

Glossary


================================================================================
Siroza 1
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/s1sbe.htm
================================================================================

S1

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

SIROZA 1

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.

1. Ohrmazd.

To Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and to the Amesha-Spentas.

NOTES:

2. Vohuman.

To Vohu-Mano; to Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is more
powerful to destroy than all other creatures; to the heavenly
Wisdom, made by Mazda; and to the Wisdom acquired through the
ear, made by Mazda.

3. Ardwahisht.

To Asha-Vahishta, the fairest; to the much-desired Airyaman, made
by Mazda; to the instrument made by Mazda; and to the good Saoka,
with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy.

4. Shahrewar.

To Khshathra-vairya; to the metals; to Mercy and Charity.

5. Spandarmad.

To the good Spenta-Armaiti, and to the good Rata, with eyes of
love, made by Mazda and holy.

6. Hordad.

To Haurvatat, the master; to the prosperity of the seasons and
to the years, the masters of holiness.

7. Amurdad.

To Ameretat, the master; to fatness and flocks; to the plenty
of corn [grain]; and to the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

(At the gah Hawan):
to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures and to Rama Hvastra.

(At the gah Rapithwin):
to Asha-Vahishta and to Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda.

(At the gah Uzerin):
to Apam Napat, the tall lord, and to the water made by Mazda.

(At the gah Aiwisruthrem):
to the Fravashis of the faithful, and to the females that
bring forth flocks of males; to the prosperity of the seasons;
to the well-shapen and tall-formed Strength, to Verethraghna,
made by Ahura, and to the crushing Ascendant.

(At the gah Ushahin):
to the holy, devout, fiend-smiting Sraosha, who makes the
world grow; to Rashnu Razishta, and to Arshtat, who makes the
world grow, who makes the world increase.

8. Dai-pa-Adar.

To the Maker Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and to the Amesha-Spentas.

9. Adar.

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; to the Glory and to the Weal,
made by Mazda; to the Glory of the Aryas, made by Mazda; to the
awful Glory of the Kavis, made by Mazda.

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; to king Husravah; to the lake
of Husravah; to Mount Asnavant, made by Mazda; to Lake Chaechasta,
made by Mazda; to the Glory of the Kavis, made by Mazda.

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; to Mount Raevant, made by Mazda;
to the Glory of the Kavis, made by Mazda.

To Atar, the beneficent, the warrior; the God who is a full source
of Glory, the God who is a full source of healing.

To Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, with all Atars;
to the God Nairyo-Sangha
, who dwells in the
navel of kings
.

4. See
Vd22.7
.

5. The fire Nairyo-sangha, as the messenger of Ahura, burns
hereditarily in the bosom of his earthly representative, the king.

10. Aban.

To the good Waters, made by Mazda; to the holy water-spring Ardvi
Anahita; to all waters made by Mazda; to all plants made by Mazda.

11. Khwarshed.

To the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun.

12. Mah.

To the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull; to the only-created
bull; to the Bull of many species.

13. Tishtar.

To Tistrya, the bright and glorious star; to the powerful Satavaesa,
made by Mazda, who pushes waters forward; to the stars, made by
Mazda, that have in them the seed of the waters, the seed of the
earth, the seed of the plants; to the star Vanant, made by Mazda:
to those stars that are seven in number, the Haptoiringas, made
by Mazda, glorious and healing.

14. Gosh.

To the body of the Cow, to the soul of the Cow, to the powerful
Drvaspa, made by Mazda and holy.

15. Dai-pa-Mihr.

To the Maker Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and to the Amesha-Spentas.

16. Mihr.

To Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who has a thousand ears
and ten thousand eyes, a God invoked by his own name; to Rama
Hvastra.

17. Srosh.

To the holy, strong Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word, a mighty-speared
and lordly God.

18. Rashn.

To Rashnu Razishta; to Arstat, who makes the world grow, who makes
the world increase; to the true-spoken speech, that makes the
world grow.

19. Frawardin.

To the awful, overpowering Fravashis of the holy ones.

20. Warharan.

To the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength; to Verethraghna, made
by Ahura; to the crushing Ascendant.

21. Ram.

To Rama Hvastra; to Vayu, who works highly and is more powerful
to destroy than all other creatures: to that part of thee, O Vayu,
that belongs to Spenta-Mainyu; to the sovereign Sky, to the Boundless
Time, to the sovereign Time of the long Period.

22. Wad.

To the bounteous Wind, that blows below, above, before, and behind;
to the manly Courage.

23. Dai-pa-Den.

To the Maker, Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious; to the Amesha-Spentas.

24. Den.

To the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy; to the good
Law of the worshippers of Mazda.

25. Ard.

To Ashi Vanguhi; to the good Chisti; to the good Erethe; to the
good Rasastat; to the Weal and Glory, made by Mazda; to Parendi,
of the light chariot; to the Glory of the Aryas made by Mazda;
to the kingly Glory made by Mazda; to that Glory that cannot be
forcibly seized, made by Mazda; to the Glory of Zarathustra, made
by Mazda.

26. Ashtad.

To Arstat, who makes the world grow; to Mount Ushi-darena, made
by Mazda, the seat of holy happiness.

27. Asman.

To the high, powerful Heavens; to the bright all-happy, blissful
abode of the holy ones.

28. Zam.

To the bounteous Earth; to these places, to these fields; to Mount
Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, the seat of holy happiness; to all
the mountains made by Mazda, that are seats of holy happiness,
of full happiness; to the kingly Glory made by Mazda; to that
Glory that cannot be forcibly seized, made by Mazda.

29. Mahraspand.

To the holy, righteousness-performing Mathra Spenta; to the Law
opposed to the Daevas, the Law of Zarathushtra; to the long-traditional
teaching; to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda; to the
Devotion to the Mathra Spenta; to the understanding that keeps
the Law of the worshippers of Mazda; to the knowledge of the Mathra
Spenta; to the heavenly Wisdom made by Mazda; to the Wisdom acquired
through the ear and made by Mazda.

30. Anagran.

To the eternal and sovereign luminous space; to the bright Garo-nmana;
to the sovereign place of eternal Weal; to the Chinvat-bridge,
made by Mazda; to the tall lord Apam Napat and to the water made
by Mazda; to Haoma, of holy birth; to the pious and good Blessing;
to the awful cursing thought of the wise;
to all the holy Gods
of the heavenly world and of the material one; to the awful, overpowering
Fravashis of the faithful, to the Fravashis of the first men of
the law, to the Fravashis of the next-of-kin; to every God invoked
by his own name.

1. 'The blessing (
âfriti
) is twofold: one by thought, one by
words; the blessing by words is more powerful; the curse
(
upamana
) in thought is the more powerful' (Neriosengh ad
Yasna I.15). Upamana is the same as the Vedic manyu.

S1

Glossary


================================================================================
Siroza 2
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/s2sbe.htm
================================================================================

S2

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

SIROZA 2.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.

NOTES:

1. Ohrmazd.

We sacrifice unto the bright and glorious Ahura Mazda; we
sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spentas, the all-ruling, the
all-beneficent.

2. Vohuman.

We sacrifice unto Vohu-Mano, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is more powerful to
destroy than all other creatures. We sacrifice unto the heavenly
Wisdom, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Wisdom acquired
through the ear, made by Mazda.

3. Ardwahisht.

We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahista, the fairest, the
Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice unto the much-desired Airyaman; we
sacrifice unto the instrument made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto
the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy.

4. Shahrewar.

We sacrifice unto Khshathra-Vairya, the Amesha-Spenta; we
sacrifice unto the metals; we sacrifice unto Mercy and Charity.

5. Spandarmad.

We sacrifice unto the good Spenta Armaiti; we sacrifice unto
the good Rata, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy.

6. Hordad.

We sacrifice unto Haurvatat, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto the prosperity of the seasons. We sacrifice unto the years,
the holy and masters of holiness.

7. Amurdad.

We sacrifice unto Ameretat, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto fatness and flocks; we sacrifice unto the plenty of corn; we
sacrifice unto the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

(At the gah Hawan): We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures; we sacrifice unto Rama Hvastra.

(At the gah Rapithwin): We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahista and
unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda.

(At the gah Uzerin): We sacrifice unto Apam Napat, the
swift-horsed, the tall and shining lord, the lord of the females;
we sacrifice unto the water made by Mazda and holy.

(At the gah Aiwisruthrem): We sacrifice unto the good,
powerful, beneficent Fravashis of the holy ones; we sacrifice
unto the females that bring forth flocks of males; we sacrifice
unto the thrift of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the well-shapen
and tall-formed Strength; we sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the crushing Ascendant.

(At the gah Ushahin): We sacrifice unto the holy,
tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha, who makes the world grow, the
holy and master of holiness; we sacrifice unto Rashnu Razishta;
we sacrifice unto Arstat, who makes the world grow, who makes the
world increase.

8. Dai-pa-Adar.

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the bright and
glorious; we sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spentas, the all-ruling,
the all-beneficent.

9. Adar.

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice
unto the Glory, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Weal, made
by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Glory of the Aryas, made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful Glory of the Kavis, made by
Mazda.

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice
unto king Husravah; we sacrifice unto the lake of Husravah; we
sacrifice unto Mount Asnavant, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto
Lake Chaechasta, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful Glory
of the Kavis, made by Mazda.

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice
unto Mount Raevant, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful
Glory of the Kavis, made by Mazda.

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice
unto Atar, the beneficent, the warrior. We sacrifice unto that
God, who is a full source of glory. We sacrifice unto that God,
who is a full source of healing.

We sacrifice unto Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda; we sacrifice
unto all Fires; we sacrifice unto the God, Nairyo-Sangha, who
dwells in the navel of kings.

10. Aban.

We sacrifice unto the good Waters, made by Mazda and holy;
we sacrifice unto the holy water-spring Ardvi Anahita; we
sacrifice unto all waters, made by Mazda and Holy; we sacrifice
unto all plants, made by Mazda and holy.

11. Khwarshed.

We sacrifice unto the bright, undying, shining, swift-horsed
Sun,

12. Mah.

We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the
Bull. We sacrifice unto the Soul and Fravashi of the
only-created Bull; we sacrifice unto the Soul and Fravashi of the
Bull of many species.

13. Tishtar.

We sacrifice unto Tistrya, the bright and glorious Star; we
sacrifice unto the powerful Satavaesa, made by Mazda, who pushes
waters forward; we sacrifice unto all the Stars that have in them
the seed of the waters; we sacrifice unto all the Stars that have
in them the seed of the earth; we sacrifice unto all the Stars
that have in them the seeds of the plants; we sacrifice unto the
Star Vanant, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto those stars that
are seven in number, the Haptoiringas, made by Mazda, glorious
and healing; in order to oppose the Yatus and Pairikas.

14. Goshorun.

We sacrifice unto the soul of the bounteous Cow; we
sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and holy.

15. Dai-pa-Mihr.

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the bright and
glorious; we sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spentas, the all-ruling,
the all-beneficent.

16. Mihr.

We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who has
a thousand ears and ten thousand eyes, a God invoked by his own
name; we sacrifice unto Rama Hvastra.

17. Srosh.

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting,
world-increasing Sraosha, holy and master of holiness.

18. Rashn.

We sacrifice unto Rashnu Razishta; we sacrifice unto Arstat,
who makes the world grow, who makes the world increase; we
sacrifice unto the true-spoken speech that makes the world grow.

19. Frawardin.

We sacrifice unto the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of
the holy ones.

20. Warharan.

We sacrifice unto the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength; we
sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura; we sacrifice unto the
crushing Ascendant.

21. Ram.

We sacrifice unto Rama Hvastra; we sacrifice unto the holy
Vayu; we sacrifice unto Vayu, who works highly and is more
powerful to destroy than all other creatures. Unto that part of
thee do we sacrifice, O Vayu, that belongs to Spenta-Mainyu. We
sacrifice unto the sovereign Sky; we sacrifice unto the Boundless
Time; we sacrifice unto the sovereign Time of the long Period.

22. Wad.

We sacrifice unto the beneficent, bounteous Wind; we
sacrifice unto the wind that blows below; we sacrifice unto the
wind that blows above; we sacrifice unto the wind that blows
before; we sacrifice unto the wind that blows behind. We
sacrifice unto the manly Courage.

23. Dai-pa-Den.

We sacrifice unto the Maker Ahura Mazda, the bright and
glorious; we sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spentas.

24. Den.

We sacrifice unto the most right Chista, made by Mazda and
holy; we sacrifice unto the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda.

25. Ard.

We sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi, the bright high, strong,
tall-formed, and merciful; we Sacrifice unto the Glory made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Weal made by Mazda. We sacrifice
unto Parendi, of the light chariot; we sacrifice unto the Glory
of the Aryas, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the awful kingly
Glory, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto that awful Glory, that
cannot be forcibly seized, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the
Glory of Zarathushtra, made by Mazda.

26. Ashtad.

We sacrifice unto Arshtat, who makes the world grow; we
sacrifice unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, a God of holy
happiness.

27. Asman.

We sacrifice unto the shining Heavens; we sacrifice unto the
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy ones.

28. Zam.

We sacrifice unto the Earth, a beneficent God; we sacrifice
unto these places, unto these fields; we sacrifice unto Mount
Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, a God of holy happiness; we sacrifice
unto all the mountains, that are seats of holy happiness, of full
happiness, made by Mazda, the holy and masters of holiness; we
sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda; we
sacrifice unto the awful Glory that cannot be forcibly seized,
made by Mazda.

29. Mahraspand.

We sacrifice unto the Mathra Spenta, of high glory; we
sacrifice unto the Law opposed to the Daevas; we sacrifice unto
the Law of Zarathushtra; we sacrifice unto the long-traditional
teaching; we sacrifice unto the good Law of the worshippers of
Mazda: we sacrifice unto the Devotion to the Mathra Spenta; we
sacrifice unto the understanding that keeps the Law of the
worshippers of Mazda; we sacrifice unto the knowledge of the
Mathra Spenta; we sacrifice unto the heavenly Wisdom, made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Wisdom acquired through the ear and
made by Mazda.

30. Anagran.

We sacrifice unto the eternal and sovereign luminous space;
we sacrifice unto the bright Garonmana; we sacrifice unto the
sovereign place of eternal Weal; we sacrifice unto the
Chinvat-bridge, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto Apam Napat, the
swift-horsed, the high and shining lord, who has many wives; and
we sacrifice unto the water, made by Mazda and holy; we sacrifice
unto the golden and tall Haoma; we sacrifice unto the enlivening
Haoma, who makes the world grow; we sacrifice unto Haoma, who
keeps death far away; we sacrifice unto the pious and good
Blessing; we sacrifice unto the awful, powerful, cursing
thought of the wise, a God; we sacrifice unto all the holy Gods of the
heavenly world; we sacrifice unto all the holy Gods of the
material world.

I praise, I invoke, I meditate upon, and we sacrifice unto
the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the holy ones.

S2

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 1
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt1sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt1

1. OHRMAZD YASHT (Hymn to Ahura Mazda)

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! May Angra Mainyu be destroyed
by those who do truly what is the foremost wish (of God).

I praise well-thought, well-spoken, and well-done thoughts, words,
and deeds. I embrace all good thoughts, good words, and good deeds;
I reject all evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.

I give sacrifice and prayer unto you, O Amesha-Spentas! even with
the fullness of my thoughts, of my words, of my deeds, and of
my heart: I give unto you even my own life.

I recite the 'Praise of Holiness:'

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good. Well is it for
it, well is it for that holiness which is perfection of holiness!'

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Savanghi
and Visya], the holy and masters of holiness;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto the
Masters of the days, of the periods of the day, of the months,
of the seasons, and of the years;

Unto AHURA MAZDA, bright and glorious, be propitiation, with sacrifice,
prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness:
the riches of Vohu-Mano shall he given to him who works in this
world for Mazda, and wields according to the will of Ahura the
power he gave him to relieve the poor.

1.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'What of the Holy Word is the strongest? What is the most victorious?
What is the most glorious? What is the most effective?

2.

'What is the most fiend-smiting? What is the best-healing?
What destroyeth best the malice of Daevas and Men? What maketh
the material world best come to the fulfillment of its wishes?
What freeth the material world best from the anxieties of the
heart?'

3.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Our Name, O Spitama Zarathushtra! who
are the Amesha-Spentas, that is the strongest part of the Holy
Word; that is the most victorious; that is the most glorious;
that is the most effective;

4.

'That is the most fiend-smiting; that is the best-healing;
that destroyeth best the malice of Daevas and Men: that maketh
the material world best come to the fulfillment of its wishes;
that freeth the material World best from the anxieties of the
heart.'

5.

Then Zarathushtra said: 'Reveal unto me that name of thine,
O Ahura Mazda! that is the greatest, the best, the fairest, the
most effective, the most fiend-smiting, the best-healing, that
destroyeth best the malice of Daevas and Men;

6.

'That I may afflict all Daevas and Men; that I may afflict
all Yatus and Pairikas; that neither Daevas nor Men may be able
to afflict me; neither Yatus nor Pairikas.'

7.

Ahura Mazda replied unto him: 'My name is the One of whom
questions are asked, O holy Zarathushtra!

'My second name is the Herd-giver

'My third name is the Strong One

'My fourth name is Perfect Holiness .

'My fifth name is All good things created by Mazda, the offspring
of the holy principle.

'My sixth name is Understanding;

'My seventh name is the One with understanding.

'My eighth name is Knowledge;

'My ninth name is the One with Knowledge.

8.

'My tenth name is Weal;

'My eleventh name is He who produces weal.

'My twelfth name is AHURA (the Lord).

'My thirteenth name is the most Beneficent.

'My fourteenth name is He in whom there is no harm.

'My fifteenth name is the unconquerable One.

'My sixteenth name is He who makes the true account.

'My seventeenth name is the All-seeing One.

'My eighteenth name is the healing One.

'My nineteenth name is the Creator.

'My twentieth name is MAZDA (the All-knowing One).

9.

Worship me, O Zarathushtra, by day and by night, with offerings
of libations well accepted I will come unto thee for help and
joy, I, Ahura Mazda; the good, holy Sraosha will come unto thee
for help and joy; the waters, the plants, and the Fravashis of
the holy ones will come unto thee for help and joy.

10.

'If thou wantest, O Zarathushtra, to destroy the malice of
Daevas and Men, of the Yatus and Pairikas, of the oppressors,
of the blind and of the deaf, of the two-legged ruffians, of the
two-legged Ashemaoghas, of the four-legged wolves;

11.

'And of the hordes with the wide front, with the many spears,
with the straight spears, with the spears uplifted, bearing the
spear of havock; then, recite thou these my names every day and
every night.

12.

'I am the Keeper; I am the Creator and the Maintainer; I am
the Discerner; I am the most beneficent Spirit.

'My name is the bestower of health; my name is the best bestower
of health.

'My name is the Athravan; my name is the most Athravan-like of
all Athravans.

'My name is Ahura (the Lord)

'My name is Mazdau (the all-knowing).

'My name is the Holy; my name is the most Holy.

'My name is the Glorious; my name is the most Glorious.

'My name is the Full-seeing; my name is the Fullest-seeing.

'My name is the Far-seeing; my name is the Farthest-seeing.

13.

'My name is the Protector; my name is the Well-wisher; my
name is the Creator; my name is the Keeper; my name is the Maintainer.

'My name is the Discerner; my name is the Best Discerner.

'My name is the Prosperity-producer; my name is the Word of Prosperity.

'My name is the King who rules at his will; my name is the King
who rules most at his will.

'My name is the liberal King; my name is the most liberal King.

14.

'My name is He who does not deceive; my name is He who is
not deceived.

'My name is the good Keeper; my name is He who destroys malice;
my name is He Who conquers at once; my name is He who conquers
everything; my name is He who has shaped everything.

'My name is All weal; my name is full weal; my name is the Master
of weal.

15.

'My name is He who can benefit at his wish; my name is He
who can best benefit at his wish.

'My name is the Beneficent One; my name is the Energetic One;
my name is the most Beneficent.

'My name is Holiness; my name is the Great One; my name is the
good Sovereign; my name is the Best of Sovereigns.

'My name is the Wise One; my name is the Wisest of the Wise; my
name is He who does good for a long time.

16.

'These are my names.

'And he who in this material world, O Spitama Zarathushtra! shall
recite and pronounce those names of mine either by day or by night;

17.

'He who shall pronounce them, when he rises up or when he
lays him down; when he lays him down or when he rises up; when
he binds on the sacred girdle [[kusti]] or when he unbinds the sacred girdle;
when he goes out of his dwelling-place, or when he goes out of
his town, or when he goes out of his country and comes into another
country:

18.

'That man, neither in that day nor in that night, shall be
wounded by the weapons of the foe who rushes Aeshma-like and is
Druj-minded; not the knife, not the cross-bow, not the arrow,
not the sword, not the club, not the sling-stone shall reach and
wound him.

19.

'But those names shall come in to keep him from behind and
to keep him in front, from the Druj unseen, from the female Varenya
fiend, from the evil-doer bent on mischief, and from that fiend
who is all death, Angra Mainyu. It will be as if there were a
thousand men watching over one man.

20.

'"Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to maintain
thy ordinances? Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and
for the next, that Sraosha may come with Vohu-Mano and help whomsoever
thou pleasest."

21.

'Hail to the Glory of the Kavis! Hail to the Airyanem Vaejah!
Hail to the Saoka, made by Mazda! Hail to the waters of the Daitya!
Hail to Ardvi, the undefiled well! Hail to the whole world of
the holy Spirit!

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord...

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

22.

'We worship the Ahuna Vairya. We worship Asha-Vahishta, most
fair, undying, and beneficent. We worship Strength and Prosperity
and Might and Victory and Glory and Vigour. We worship Ahura Mazda,
bright and glorious.

'Yenghe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda knows the
goodness for a sacrifice [performed] in holiness, all those beings,
males and females, do we worship.

23.

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and the prayer unto Ahura Mazda, bright
and glorious, and his strength and vigour.'

(Bahman Yasht.)

24.

'O Zarathushtra! keep thou for ever that man who is friendly
[to me] from the foe unfriendly [to me]! Do not give up that friend
unto the stroke (of the foe), unto vexations to be borne; wish
no harm unto that man who would offer me a sacrifice, be it ever
so great or ever so small, if it has reached unto us, the Amesha-Spentas.

25.

'Here is Vohu-Mano, my creature, O Zarathushtra! here is Asha-Vahishta,
my creature, O Zarathushtra! here is Khshathra-Vairya, my creature,
O Zarathushtra! here is Spenta-Armaiti, my creature, O Zarathushtra!
here are Haurvatat and Ameretat, who are the reward of the holy
ones, when freed from their bodies, my creatures, O Zarathushtra!

26.

'Thou knowest this, and how it is, O holy Zarathushtra! from
my understanding and from my knowledge; namely, how the world
first began, and how it will end.

'A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies!

'A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies!

'A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies!

27.

'[We worship] the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength; Verethraghna,
made by Ahura; the crushing Ascendant, and Spenta-Armaiti.

28.

'And with the help of Spenta-Armaiti, break ye asunder their
malice, turn their minds astray, bind their hands, make their
knees quake against one another, bind their tongues.

'When, O Mazda! shall the faithful smite the wicked? When shall
the faithful smite the Druj? When shall the faithful smite the
wicked?'

29.

Then Zarathushtra said: 'I threw you back into the earth,
and by the eyes of Spenta-Armaiti the ruffian was made powerless.

30.

'We worship the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda; the powerful
Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

31.

'We worship the memory of Ahura Mazda to keep the Holy Word.

'We worship the understanding of Ahura Mazda, to study the Holy
Word.

'We worship the tongue of Ahura Mazda, to speak forth the Holy
Word.

'We worship the mountain that gives understanding, that preserves
understanding; [we worship it] by day and by night, with offerings
of libations well-accepted.

32.

'We worship that creation [of Ahura's], Spenta-Armaiti; and
the holy creations of that creature and of Asha [Vahishta], that
are foremost in holiness.

'Here I take as lord and master the greatest of all, Ahura Mazda;
to smite the fiend Angra Mainyu; to smite Aeshma of the wounding
spear; to smite the Mazainya fiends; to smite all the Daevas and
the Varenya fiends; to increase Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious;
to increase the Amesha-Spentas; to increase the star Tishtrya,
the bright and glorious; to increase the faithful men; to increase
all the holy creatures of the beneficent Spirit.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

33.

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health
of body, give him sturdiness of body, give him victorious strength
of body, give him full welfare of wealth, give him a virtuous
offspring, give him long, long life, give him the bright, all-happy,
blissful abode of the holy Ones.

May it come according to my blessing!

'A thousand remedies, ten thousand remedies! (three times.)

'Come to me for help, O Mazda!

'We worship the well-shapen, tall-formed Strength, and Verethraghna,
made by Mazda, and the crushing Ascendant.

'We worship Rama Hvastra, and Vayu who works highly and is more
powerful to destroy than all other creatures. That part of thee
do we worship, O Vayu, that belongs to Spenta Mainyu. We worship
the sovereign Sky, the boundless Time, and the sovereign Time
of the long Period.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....'

Yt1


================================================================================
Yasht 2
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt2sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt2

2. HAPTAN YASHT.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.
May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!...

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of
Zarathushtra, one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of
Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto
[Havani], the holy and master of holiness....

[[1]]

1.
To Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and to the
Amesha-Spentas;

To Vohu-Mano; to Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is
more powerful to destroy than all other creatures; to the
heavenly Wisdom, made by Mazda, and to the Wisdom acquired
through the ear, made by Mazda;

2.
To Asha-Vahishta, the fairest; to the much-desired Airyaman;
to the instrument made by Mazda: and to the good Saoka, with eyes
of love, made by Mazda and holy;

To Khshathra-Vairya; to the metals; to Mercy and Charity.

3.
To the good Spenta-Armaiti, and to the good Rata, with eyes
of love, made by Mazda and holy;

To Haurvatat, the master; to the prosperity of the seasons
and to the years, the masters of holiness;

And to Ameretat, the master; to fatness and flocks; to the
plenty of corn; and to the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

4.
(At the Gah Hawan): To Mithra, the lord of wide pastures and
to Rama Hvastra.

(At the Gah Rapithwin): To Asha-Vahishta and to Atar, the
son of Ahura Mazda.

(At the Gah, Uzerin): To Apam Napat, the tall lord, and to
water, made by Mazda.

5.
(At the Gah Aiwisruthrem): To the Fravashis of the faithful
and to the females that bring forth flocks of males; to the
prosperity of the seasons; to the well-shapen and tall-formed
Strength; to Verethraghna, made by Ahura, and to the crushing
Ascendant.

(At the Gah Usahin): To the holy, devout, fiend-smiting
Sraosha, who makes the world grow; to Rashnu-Razishta and to
Arshtat, who makes the world grow, who makes the world increase;

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation and
glorification!

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of
holiness....

[[2]]

6.
We sacrifice unto Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious; we
sacrifice unto the Amesha-Spentas, the all-ruling, the
all-beneficent.

We sacrifice unto Vohu-Mano, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto Peace, whose breath is friendly, and who is more powerful to
destroy than all other creatures; we sacrifice unto the heavenly
Wisdom, made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto the Wisdom acquired
through the ear, made by Mazda.

7.
We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahishta, the fairest, the
Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice unto the much-desired Airyaman; we
sacrifice unto the instrument made by Mazda; we sacrifice unto
the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy.

We sacrifice unto Khshathra-Vairya; we sacrifice unto the
metals; we sacrifice unto Mercy and Charity.

8.
We sacrifice unto the good Spenta-Armaiti; we sacrifice unto
the good Rata, with eyes of love, made by Mazda and holy.

We sacrifice unto Haurvatat, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto the prosperity of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the years,
the holy and masters of holiness.

We sacrifice unto Ameretat, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto fatness and flocks; we sacrifice unto the plenty of corn; we
sacrifice unto the powerful Gaokerena, made by Mazda.

9.
(At the Gah Hawan): We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures; we sacrifice unto Rama Hvastra.

(At the Gah Rapithwin): We sacrifice unto Asha-Vahishta and
Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda.

(At the Gah Uzerin): We sacrifice unto Apam Napat, the
swift-horsed, the tall and shining lord, the lord of the females;
we sacrifice unto the holy waters, made by Mazda.

10.
(At the Gah Aiwisruthrem): We sacrifice unto the good,
powerful, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful; we sacrifice unto
the females who bring forth flocks of males; we sacrifice unto
the prosperity of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the well-shapen,
tall-formed Strength; we sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by
Mazda; we sacrifice unto the crushing Ascendant.

(At the Gah Ushahin): We sacrifice unto the holy,
tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha; who makes the world grow, the
holy an master of holiness; we sacrifice unto Rashnu-Razishta; we
sacrifice unto Arshtat, who makes the world grow, who makes the
world increase

[[3]]

11.
Let the Yatus be crushed, O Zarathushtra! both Daevas and
men.

Who is he in whose house, O Spitama Zarathushtra! every Druj
is destroyed, every Druj perishes, when he pronounces these
words:

12.
........?

13.
It is he who takes the seven Amesha-Spentas, the all-ruling,
the all-beneficent, as a shield against his enemies.

We worship the Law of the worshippers of Mazda; we worship
the waters coming in the shape of a horse, made by Mazda.

14-15.

He has renounced trespasses and faults, O Zarathustra! he
has renounced all trespasses and faults, O Zarathustra! when he
throws down the destroyer of Vohu-Mano and his words, with a
hundred times hundredfold, with a many times manifold preaching
and smiting, and he takes away the Law of Mazda, that was carried
away as a prisoner, from the hands of the [ungodly], who are
destroyed by his strength.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

16.
Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of
holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and the prayer, the strength and
vigour

Of Ahura Mazda, bright and glorious, and of the
Amesha-Spentas;

Of Vohu-Mano; of Peace, whose breath is friendly....

Of Asha-Vahishta, the fairest; of the much-desired
Airyaman....

Of Khshathra-Vairya, of the metals....

Of the good Spenta-Armaiti and of the good Rata....

Of Haurvatat, the master....

Of Ameretat, the master....

(At the Gah Hawan): Of Mithra....

(At the Gah Rapithwin): Of Asha-Vahishta....

(At the Gah Uzerin): Of the high lord Apam Napat....

(At the Gah Aiwisruthrem): Of the Fravashis of the
faithful....

(At the Gah Ushahin): Of the holy, devout, fiend-smiting
Sraosha, who makes the world grow; of Rashnu-Razishta and of
Arshtat, who makes the world grow, who makes the world increase.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body, give him sturdiness of body, give him victorious strength
of body, give him full welfare of wealth, give him a virtuous
offspring,
give him long, long life, give him the bright, all-happy,
blissful abode of the holy Ones.

Yt2


================================================================================
Yasht 3
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt3sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt3

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

3. ARDWAHISHT YASHT ("Hymn to the Highest Asha")

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! ....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto Asha-Vahishta, the fairest; unto the much-desired Airyaman,
made by Mazda, and unto the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made
by Mazda and holy;

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

[[1]]

1.

Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'That
thou mayest increase Asha-Vahishta, O Spitama Zarathushtra! with
hymns of praise, with performance of the office, with invocations,
holy words, sacrifice, blessings, and adoration - once to abide
in the shining luminous space, in the beautiful abodes - for the
sacrifice and invocation of us, the Amesha-Spentas'....

2.

Zarathushtra said: 'Say unto me the right words, such as they
are, O Ahura Mazda! that I may increase Asha-Vahishta, with hymns
of praise, with performance of the office, with invocations, holy
words, sacrifice, blessings, and adoration, - once to abide in
the shining luminous space, in the beautiful abodes, - for the
sacrifice and invocation of you, the Amesha-Spentas.

3.

'.... I proclaim Asha-Vahishta: if I proclaim Asha-Vahishta,
then easy is the way to the abode of the other Amesha-Spentas,
which Ahura Mazda keeps with Good Thoughts, which Ahura Mazda
keep with Good Words, which Ahura Mazda keeps with Good Deeds;

4.

'(Easy is the way to the Garo-nmana of Ahura Mazda): the Garo-nmana
is for the holy souls, and no one of the wicked can enter the
Garo-nmana and its bright, wide, holy ways; (no one of them can
go) to Ahura Mazda.

[[2]]

5.

'The Airyaman prayer smites down the strength of all the creatures
of Angra Mainyu, of the Yatus and Pairikas. It is the greatest
of spells, the best of spells, the very best of all spells; the
fairest of spells, the very fairest of all spells; the fearful
one amongst spells, the most fearful of all spells; the firm one
amongst spells, the firmest of all spells; the victorious one
amongst spells, the most victorious of all spells; the healing
one amongst spells, the best-healing of all spells.

6.

'One may heal with Holiness, one may heal with the Law, one
may heal with the knife, one may heal with herbs, one may heal
with the Holy Word: amongst all remedies this one is the healing
one that heals with the Holy Word; this one it is at will best
drive away sickness from the body of the faithful: for this one
is the best-healing of all remedies.

7.

'Sickness fled away [before it], Death fled away; the Daeva
fled away, the Daeva's counter-work fled away; the unholy Ashemaogha
fled away, the oppressor of men fled away.

8.

'The brood of the Snake fled away; the brood of the Wolf fled
away; the brood of the Two-legged fled away. Pride fled away;
Scorn fled away; Hot Fever fled away; Slander fled away; Discord
fled away; the Evil Eye fled away.

9.

'The most lying words of falsehood fled away; the Jahi, addicted
to the Yatu, fled away; the Jahi, who makes one pine, fled away;
the wind that blows from the North fled away; the wind that blows
from the North vanished away.

10.

'He it is who smites me that brood of the Snake, and who might
smite those Daevas by thousands of thousands, by ten thousands
of ten thousands; he smites sickness, he smites death, he smites
the Daevas, he smites the Daeva's counter-work, he smites the
unholy Ashemaogha, he smites the oppressor of men.

11.

'He smites the brood of the Snake; he smites the brood of
the Wolf; he smites the brood of the Two-legged. He smites Pride;
he smites Scorn; he smites Hot Fever; he smites Slander; he smites
Discord; he smites the Evil Eye.

12.

'He smites the most lying words of falsehood; he smites the
Jahi, addicted to the Yatu; he smites the Jahi, who makes one
pine. He smites the wind that blows from the North; the wind that
blows from the North vanished away.

13.

'He it is who smites me that brood of the Two-legged, and
who might smite those Daevas, by thousands of thousands, by ten
thousands of ten thousands. Angra Mainyu, who is all death, the
worst-lying of all Daevas, rushed from before him:

14.

'He exclaimed, did Angra Mainyu: "Woe is me! Here is
the god Asha-Vahishta, who will smite the sickliest of all sicknesses,
who will afflict the sickliest of all sicknesses;

'"He will smite the deadliest of all deaths, he will afflict
the deadliest of all deaths;

'"He will smite the most fiendish of all fiends, he will
afflict the most fiendish of all fiends;

'"He will smite the most counter-working of all counter-works,
he will afflict the most counter-working of all counter-works;

'"He will smite the unholy Ashemaogha, he will afflict the
unholy Ashemaogha;

'"He will smite the most oppressive of the oppressors of
men, he will afflict most oppressive of the oppressors of men.

15.

'"He will smite the snakiest of the Snake's brood, he
will afflict the snakiest of the Snake's brood;

'"He will smite the most wolfish of the Wolf's brood, he
will afflict the most wolfish of the Wolf's brood;

'"He will smite the worst of the two-legged brood, he will
afflict the worst of the two-legged brood;

'"He will smite Pride, he will afflict Pride;

'"He will smite Scorn, he will afflict Scorn;

'"He will smite the hottest of hot fevers, he will afflict
the hottest of hot fevers;

'"He will smite the most slanderous of slanders, he will
afflict the most slanderous of slanders;

'"He will smite the most discordant of discords, he will
afflict the most discordant of discords;

'"He will smite the worst of the Evil Eye, he will afflict
the worst of the Evil Eye.

16.

'"He will smite the most lying words of falsehood, he
will afflict the most lying words of falsehood;

'"He will smite the Jahi, addicted to the Yatu, he will afflict
the Jahi, addicted to the Yatu;

'"He will smite the Jahi, who makes one pine, he will afflict
the Jahi, who makes one pine;

'"He will smite the wind that blows from the North, he will
afflict the wind that blows from the North."

17.

'The Druj will perish away, the Druj will perish; the Druj
will rush, the Druj will vanish. Thou perishest away to the regions
of the North, never more to give unto death the living world of
the holy spirit.

18.

'For his brightness and glory I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto Asha-Vahishta, the fairest - the
Amesha-Spenta. Unto Asha-Vahishta, the fairest, the Amesha-Spenta,
we offer up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the
wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds,
the libations, and the rightly-spoken words.

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda knows the goodness....

19.

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer and the strength and vigour
of Asha-Vahishta, the fairest; of the much-desired Airyaman, made
by Mazda; and of the good Saoka, with eyes of love, made by Mazda
and holy.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body; .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.'

Go to [

|
Khorda Avesta: Contents

|

|
Ardwahisht Yasht

|

|
]


================================================================================
Yasht 4
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt4sbe.htm
================================================================================

4. HORDAD YASHT.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! ....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of
Zarathushtra, one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of
Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto
[Hawan], the holy and master of holiness ....

Unto Haurvatat, the master; unto the prosperity of the
seasons and unto the years, the masters of holiness,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and
glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of
holiness....

We sacrifice unto Haurvatat, the Amesha-Spenta; we sacrifice
unto the prosperity of the seasons; we sacrifice unto the years,
the holy and masters of holiness.

1.
Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'I
created for the faithful the help, the enjoyments, the comforts,
and the pleasures of Haurvatat. We unite them with him who would
come up to thee as one of the Amesha-Spentas, as he would come to
any of the Amesha-Spentas, Vohu-Mano, Asha-Vahishta,
Khshathra-Vairya, Spenta-Armaiti, Haurvatat, and Ameretat.

2.
'He who against the thousands of thousands of those Daevas,
against their ten thousands of ten thousands, against their
numberless myriads would invoke the name of Haurvatat, as one of
the Amesha-Spentas, he would smite the Nasu, he would smite
Hashi, he would smite Bashi, he would smite Saeni, he would
smite Buji.

3.
'I proclaim the faithful man as the first [of men]; if I
proclaim the faithful man as the first [of men], then Rashnu
Razishta, then every heavenly Yazata of male nature in company
with the Amesha-Spentas will free the faithful man

4.
'From the Nasu, from Hashi, from Gashi, from Saeni, from
Buji; from the hordes with the wide front, from the hordes with
the many spears uplifted, from the evil man who oppresses, from
the willful sinner, from the oppressor of men, from the Yatu,
from the Pairika, from the straying way.

5.
'How does the way of the faithful turn and part from the way
of the wicked?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is when a man pronouncing my
spell, either reading or reciting it by heart, draws the furrows
and hides there himself, [saying]:

6.
'"I will smite thee, O Druj! whomsoever thou art, whomsoever
thou art amongst the Drujes that come in an open way, whomsoever
thou art amongst the Drujes that come by hidden way, whomsoever
thou art amongst the Drujes that defile by contact; whatsoever
Druj thou art, I smite thee away from the Aryan countries;
whatsoever Druj thou art, I bind thee; I smite thee down, O Druj!
I throw thee down below, O Druj!"

7.
'He draws [then] three furrows: I proclaim him one of the
faithful; he draws six furrow: I proclaim him one of the
faithful; he draws nine furrows: I proclaim him one of the
faithful.

8.
'The names of those (Amesha-Spentas) smite the men turned to
Nasus by the Drujes: the seed and kin of the deaf are smitten,
the scornful are dead, as the Zaotar Zarathushtra blows them
away to woe, however fierce, at his will and wish, as many as he
wishes.

9.
'From the time when the sun is down he smites them with
bruising blows; from the time when the sun is no longer up, he
deals deadly blows on the Nasu with his club struck down, for the
propitiation and glorification of the heavenly gods.

10.
'O Zarathushtra! let not that spell be shown to any one,
except by the father to his son, or by the brother to his brother
from the same womb, or by the Athravan to his pupil in black
hair, devoted to the good law, who, devoted to the good law,
holy and brave, stills all the Drujes.

11.
'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a
sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto Haurvatat, the
Amesha-Spenta. Unto Haurvatat, the Amesha-Spenta, we offer up the
libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the
tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words.

12.

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of
holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and
vigour of Haurvatat, the master; of the prosperity of the seasons
and of the years, the masters of holiness.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him
the bright, all happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.'

Go to [

|
Khorda Avesta: Contents

|

|
Hordad Yasht

|

|
]


================================================================================
Yasht 5
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt5sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt5

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

5. ABAN YASHT ("Hymn to the Waters").

This digital edition copyright © 1995 by Joseph H. Peterson.
All rights reserved.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hawan],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto the good Waters, made by Mazda; unto the holy water-spring
ARDVI ANAHITA; unto all waters, made by Mazda; unto all plants,
made by Mazda,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

NOTES:

I.

1.
Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'Offer
up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring of mine,
Ardvi Sura Anahita, the wide-expanding and health-giving, who
hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura, who is worthy of
sacrifice in the material world, worthy of prayer in the material
world; the life-increasing and holy, the herd-increasing and holy,
the fold-increasing and holy, the wealth-increasing and holy,
the country-increasing and holy;

2.
'Who makes the seed of all males pure, who makes the womb
of all females pure for bringing forth, who makes all females
bring forth in safety, who puts milk into the breasts of all females
in the right measure and the right quality;

3.
'The large river, known afar, that is as large as the whole
of the waters that run along the earth; that runs powerfully from
the height Hukairya down to the sea Vouru-Kasha.

4.
'All the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are boiling over, all
the middle of it is boiling over, when she runs down there, when
she streams down there, she, Ardvi Sura Anahita, who has a thousand
cells and a thousand channels: the extent of each of those cells,
of each of those channels is as much as a man can ride in forty
days, riding on a good horse.

5.
'From this river of mine alone flow all the waters that spread
all over the seven Karshvares; this river of mine alone goes on
bringing waters, both in summer and in winter. This river of mine
purifies the seed in males, the womb in females the milk in females'
breasts.

6.
'I, Ahura Mazda, brought it down with mighty vigor, for the
increase of the house, of the borough of the town, of the country,
to keep them, to maintain them, to look over them, to keep and
maintain them close.

7.
'Then Ardvi Sura Anahita, O Spitama Zarathushtra! proceeded
forth from the Maker Mazda. Beautiful were her white arms, thick
as a horse's shoulder or still thicker; beautiful was her ....,
and thus came she, strong, with thick arms, thinking thus in her
heart:

8.
'"Who will praise me? Who will offer me a sacrifice,
with libations cleanly prepared and well-strained, together with
the Haoma and meat? To whom shall I cleave, who cleaves unto me,
and thinks with me, and bestows gifts upon me, and is of good
will unto me?"

9.
'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice
worth being heard; I will offer up unto the holy Ardvi Sura Anahita
a good sacrifice with an offering of libations;- thus mayest thou
advise us when thou art appealed to! Mayest thou be most fully
worshipped, O Ardvi Sura Anahita! with the Haoma and meat, with
the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells,
with the words with the deeds, with the libations, and with the
rightly-spoken words.

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

II.

10. 'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita, the wide-expanding and health-giving,
who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura, who is worthy
of sacrifice in the material world, worthy of prayer in the material
world; the life-increasing and holy, the herd-increasing and holy,
the fold-increasing and holy, the wealth-increasing and holy,
the country-increasing and holy;

11.
'Who drives forwards on her chariot, holding the reins of
the chariot. She goes, driving, on this chariot, longing for men
and thinking thus in her heart: "Who will praise me? Who
will offer me a sacrifice, with libations cleanly prepared and
well-strained, together with the Haoma and meat? To whom shall
I cleave, who cleaves unto me, and thinks with me, and bestows
gifts unto me, and is of good will unto me?"

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice, worth
being heard....

III.

12.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

13.
'Whom four horses carry, all white, of one and the same color,
of the same blood, tall, crushing down the hates of all haters,
of the Daevas and men, of the Yatus and Pairikas, of the oppressors,
of the blind and of the deaf.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice ....

IV.

14.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

15.
'Strong and bright, tall and beautiful of form, who sends
down by day and by night a flow of motherly waters as large as
the whole of the waters that run along the earth, and who runs
powerfully.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

V.

16.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

17.
'To her did the Maker Ahura Mazda offer up a sacrifice to
the Airyana Vaejah, by the good river Daitya; with the Haoma and
meat, with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the
holy spells, with the words, with the deeds, with the libations,
and with the rightly-spoken words.

18.
He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may bring the son of
Pourushaspa, the holy Zarathushtra, to think after my law, to
speak after my law, to do after my law!"

19.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and begging that she would
grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

VI.

20.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

21.
'To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradhata, offer up a sacrifice
on the enclosure of the Hara, with a hundred male horses, a thousand
oxen, and ten thousand lambs.

22.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita, that I may become the sovereign
lord of all countries, of the Daevas and men, of the Yatus and
Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind and the deaf; and that
I may smite down two thirds of the Daevas of Mazana and of the
fiends of Varena."

23.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

VII.

24.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

25.
'To her did Yima Khshaeta, the good shepherd, offer up a sacrifice
from the height Hukairya, with a hundred male horses, a thousand
oxen, ten thousand lambs.

26.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may become the sovereign
lord of all countries, of the Daevas and men, of the Yatus and
Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind and the deaf; and that
I may take from the Daevas both riches and welfare, both fatness
and flocks, both weal and Glory."

27.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

VIII.

28.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

29.
'To her did Azi Dahaka, the three-mouthed, offer up a sacrifice
in the land of Bawri, with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen,
and ten thousand lambs.

30.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this boon,
O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may make all
the seven Karshvares of the earth empty of men."

31.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita did not grant him that boon, although
he was offering libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating
her that she would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

IX.

32.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto Ardvi
Sura Anahita....

33.
'To her did Thraetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya clan,
offer up a sacrifice in the four-cornered Varena, with a hundred
male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs.

34.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome Azi Dahaka,
the three-mouthed, the three-headed, the six-eyed, who has a thousand
senses, that most powerful, fiendish Druj, that demon, baleful
to the world, the strongest Druj that Angra Mainyu created against
the material world, to destroy the world of the good principle;
and that I may deliver his two wives, Savanghavach and Erenavach,
who are the fairest of body amongst women, and the most wonderful
creatures in the world."

35.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

X.

36.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto Ardvi
Sura Anahita....

37.
'To her did Keresaspa, the manly-hearted, offer up a sacrifice
behind the Vairi Pisanah, with a hundred male horses, a thousand
oxen, ten thousand lambs.

38.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome the golden-heeled
Gandarewa, though all the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are boiling
over; and that I may run up to the stronghold of the fiend on
the wide, round earth, whose ends lie afar."

39.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XI.

40.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sara Anahita....

41.
'To her did the Turanian murderer, Frangrasyan, offer up a
sacrifice in his cave under the earth, with a hundred male horses,
a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs.

42.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may seize hold of that
Glory, that is waving in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha and
that belongs to the Aryan people, to those born and to those not
yet born, and to the holy Zarathushtra."

43.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita did not grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XII.

44.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

45.
'To her did the great, most wise Kavi Usa offer up a sacrifice
from Mount Erezifya, with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen,
ten thousand lambs.

46.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me, this, O
good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may become the
sovereign lord of all countries, of the Daevas and men, of the
Yatus and Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind and the deaf."

47.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XIII.

48.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

49.
'To her did the gallant Husravah, he who united the Aryan
nations into one kingdom, offer up a sacrifice behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake, of salt waters, with a hundred male horses,
a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs.

50.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may become the sovereign
lord of all countries, of Daevas and men, of the Yatus and Pairikas,
of the oppressors, the blind and the deaf; and that I may have
the lead in front of all the teams and that he may not pass through
the forest , he, the murderer, who now is fiercely striving against
me on horseback."

51.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XIV.

52.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

53. 'To her did the valiant warrior Tusa
offer
worship on the
back of his horse, begging swiftness for his teams, health for
his own body, and that he might watch with full success those
who hated him, smite down his foes, and destroy at one stroke
his adversaries, his enemies, and those who hated him.

11. Tusa, in the Shah Nameh Tus; one of the most celebrated
Pahlavans of Kay Khosaw; he was the son of king Naotara
(Nodar).

54.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome the gallant
sons of Vaesaka, by the castle Khshathro-saoka, that stands high
up on the lofty, holy Kangha; that I may smite of the Turanian
people their fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and their
thousands, their thousands and their tens of thousands, their
tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads."

55.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XV.

56.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

57.
'To her did the gallant sons of Vaesaka offer up a sacrifice
in the castle Khshathro-saoka, that stands high up on the lofty,
holy Kangha, with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten
thousand lambs.

58.
'They begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant us this, O
good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that we may overcome
the valiant warrior Tusa, and that we may smite of the Aryan people
their fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands,
their thousands and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands
and their myriads of myriads."

59.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita did not grant them that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XVI.

60.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

61.
'The old Vafra Navaza worshipped her when the strong fiend-smiter,
Thraetaona, flung him up in the air in the shape of a bird, of
a vulture.

62.
'He went on flying, for three days and three nights, towards
his own house; but he could not, he could not turn down. At the
end of the third night, when the beneficent dawn came dawning
up, then he prayed unto Ardvi Sura Anahita, saying:

63.
'"Ardvi Sura Anahita! do thou quickly hasten helpfully
and bring me assistance at once. I will offer thee a thousand
libations, cleanly prepared and well strained, along with Haomas
and meat, by the brink of the river Rangha, if I reach alive the
earth made by Ahura and my own house."

64.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita hastened unto him in the shape of a maid,
fair of body, most strong, tall-formed, high-girdled, pure, nobly
born of a glorious race, wearing shoes up to the ankle wearing
a golden...., and radiant.

65.
'She seized him by the arm: quickly was it done, nor was it
long till, speeding, he arrived at the earth made by Mazda and
at his own house, safe, unhurt, unwounded, just as he was before.

[66.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, entreating that she would
grant him that boon.]

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XVII.

67.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

68.
'To her did Jamaspa offer up a sacrifice, with a hundred horses,
a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, when he saw the army of the
wicked, of the worshippers of the Daevas, coming from afar in
battle array.

69.
'He asked of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may be as constantly
victorious as any one of all the Aryans."

70.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XVIII.

71.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

72.
'To her did Ashavazdah, the son of Pouru-dhakhshti, and Ashavazdah
and Thrita, the sons of Sayuzhdri, offer up a sacrifice, with
a hundred horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, by Apam
Napat, the tall lord, the lord of the females, the bright and
swift-horsed.

73.
'They begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant us this, O
good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that we may overcome
the assemblers of the Turanian Danus, Kara Asabana, and Vara Asabana,
and the most mighty Duraekaeta, in the battles of this world.

74.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted them that boon, as they were offering
up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant them that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, l will offer her a sacrifice....

XIX.

75.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

76.
'Vistauru, the son of Naotara, worshipped her by the brink
of the river Vitanghuhaiti, with well-spoken words, speaking thus:

77.
'"This is true, this is truly spoken, that I have smitten
as many of the worshippers of the Daevas as the hairs I bear on
my head. Do thou then, O Ardvi Sura Anahita! leave me a dry passage,
to pass over the good Vitanghuhaiti."

78.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita hastened unto him in the shape of a maid,
fair of body, most strong, tall-formed, high-girded, pure, nobly
born of a glorious race, wearing shoes up to the ankle, with all
sorts of ornaments and radiant. A part of the waters she made
stand still, a part of the waters she made flow forward, and she
left him a dry passage to pass over the good Vitanghuhaiti.

[79.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.]

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XX.

80.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

81.
'To her did Yoishta, one of the Fryanas, offer up a sacrifice
with a hundred horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs on
the Pedvaepa of the Rangha.

82.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome the evil-doing
Akhtya, the offspring of darkness, and that I may answer the ninety-nine
hard riddles that he asks me maliciously, the evil-doing Akhtya,
the offspring of darkness."

83.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXI.

84.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

85.
'Whom Ahura Mazda the merciful ordered thus, saying: "Come,
O Ardvi Sura Anahita, come from those stars down to the earth
made by Ahura, that the great lords may worship thee, the masters
of the countries, and their sons.

86.
'"The men of strength will beg of thee swift horses and
supremacy of Glory.

'"The Athravans who read and the pupils of the Athravans
will beg of thee knowledge and prosperity, the Victory made by
Ahura, and the crushing Ascendant.

87.
'"The maids of barren womb, longing for a lord, will
beg of thee a strong husband;

'"Women, on the point of bringing forth, will beg of thee
a good delivery.

'"All this wilt thou grant unto them, as it lies in thy power,
O Ardvi Sura Anahita!"

88.
'Then Ardvi Sura Anahita came forth, O Zarathushtra! down
from those stars to the earth made by Mazda; and Ardvi Sura Anahita
spake thus:

89.
'"O pure, holy Zarathushtra! Ahura Mazda has established
thee as the master of the material world: Ahura Mazda has established
me to keep the whole of the holy creation.

'"Through my brightness and glory flocks and herds and two-legged
men go on, upon the earth: I, forsooth, keep all good things,
made by Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle, just as a
shepherd keeps his flock."

90.
'Zarathushtra asked Ardvi Sura Anahita: "O Ardvi Sura
Anahita! With what manner of sacrifice shall I worship thee? With
what manner of sacrifice shall I worship and forward thee? So
that Mazda may make thee run down (to the earth), that he may
not make thee run up into the heavens, above the sun; and that
the Serpent may not injure thee with...., with...., with....,
and.... poisons."

91.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita answered: "O pure, holy Spitama!
this is the sacrifice wherewith thou shalt worship me, this is
the sacrifice wherewith thou shalt worship and forward me, from
the time when the sun is rising to the time when the sun is setting.

'"Of this libation of mine thou shalt drink, thou who art
an Athravan, who hast asked and learnt the revealed law, who art
wise, clever, and the Word incarnate.

92.
'"Of this libation of mine let no foe drink, no man fever-sick,
no liar, no coward, no jealous one, no woman, no faithful one
who does not sing the Gathas, no leper to be confined.

93.
'"I do not accept those libations that are drunk in my
honor by the blind, by the deaf, by the wicked, by the destroyers,
by the niggards, by the...., nor any of those stamped with those
characters which have no strength for the holy Word.

'"Let no one drink of these my libations who is hump-backed
or bulged forward; no fiend with decayed teeth."

94.
'Then Zarathushtra asked Ardvi Sura Anahita: "O Ardvi
Sura Anahita! What becomes of those libations which the wicked
worshippers of the Daevas bring unto thee after the sun has set?"

95.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita answered: "O pure, holy Spitama Zarathushtra!
howling, clapping, hopping, and shouting, six hundred and a thousand
Daevas, who ought not to receive that sacrifice, receive those
libations that men bring unto me after [the sun has set]."

96.
'I will worship the height Hukairya, of the deep precipices,
made of gold, wherefrom this mine Ardvi Sura Anahita leaps, from
a hundred times the height of a man, while she is possessed of
as much Glory as the whole of the waters that run along the earth,
and she runs powerfully.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXII.

97.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

98.
'Before whom the worshippers of Mazda stand with baresma in
their hands: the Hvovas did worship her, the Naotaras did worship
her; the Hvovas asked for riches, the Naotaras asked for swift
horses. Quickly was Hvova blessed with riches an full prosperity;
quickly became Vishtaspa, the Naotaride, the lord of the swiftest
horses in these countries.

99.
['Ardvi Sura Anahita granted them that boon, as they were
offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating
that she would grant them that boon.]

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXIII.

100.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

101.
'Who has a thousand cells and a thousand channels: the extent
of each of those cells, of each of those channels, is as much
as a man can ride in forty days, riding on a good horse. In each
channel there stands a palace, well-founded, shining with a hundred
windows, with a thousand columns, well-built, with ten thousand
balconies, and mighty.

102.
'In each of those palaces there lies a well-laid, well-scented
bed, covered with pillows, and Ardvi Sura Anahita, O Zarathushtra!
runs down there from a thousand times the height of a man, and
she is possessed of as much Glory as the whole of the waters that
run along the earth, and she runs powerfully.

XXIV.

103.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

104.
'Unto her did the holy Zarathushtra offer up a sacrifice in
the Airyana Vaejah, by the good river Daitya; with the Haoma and
meat, with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the
holy spells, with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations,
and with the rightly-spoken words.

105.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may bring the son of
Aurvat-aspa, the valiant Kavi Vistaspa, to think according to
the law, to speak according to the law, to do according to the
law."

106.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was
offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating
that she would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXV.

107.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

108.
'Unto her did the tall Kavi Vishtaspa offer up a sacrifice
behind Lake Frazdanava, with a hundred male horses, a thousand
oxen, ten thousand lambs.

109.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome Tathravant,
of the bad law, and Peshana, the worshipper of the Daevas and
the wicked Arejat-aspa, in the battles of this world!"

110.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering
up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she
would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXVI.

111.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

112.
'Unto her did Zairi-vairi, who fought on horseback, offer
up a sacrifice behind the river Daitya, with a hundred male horses,
a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs.

113.
'He begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant me this, O good,
most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome Pesho-Changha
the corpse-burier, Humayaka the worshipper of the Daevas, and
the wicked Arejat-aspa, in the battles of this world.

114.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was
offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating
that she would grant him that boon.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXVII.

115.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

116.
'Unto her did Arejat-aspa and Vandaremaini offer up a sacrifice
by the sea Vouru-Kasha, with a hundred male horses, a thousand
oxen, ten thousand lambs.

117.
'They begged of her a boon, saying: "Grant us this, O
good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that we may conquer
the valiant Kavi Vishtaspa and Zairivairi who fights on horseback,
and that we may smite of the Aryan people their fifties and their
hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands, their thousands
and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands and their
myriads of myriads."

118.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita did not grant them that favor, though
they were offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and
entreating that she should grant them that favor.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXVIII.

119.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

120.
'For whom Ahura Mazda has made four horses -- the wind,
the rain, the cloud, and the sleet -- and thus ever a upon the
earth it is raining, snowing, hailing, and sleeting; and whose
armies are so many and numbered by nine-hundreds and thousands.

121.
'I will worship the height Hukairya, of the deep precipices,
made of gold, wherefrom this mine Ardvi Sura Anahita leaps, from
a hundred times the height of a man, while she is possessed of
as much Glory as the whole of the waters that run along the earth,
and she runs powerfully.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXIX.

122.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

123.
'She stands, the good Ardvi Sura Anahita, wearing a golden
mantle, waiting for a man who shall offer her libations and prayers,
and thinking thus in her heart:

124.
"'Who will praise me? Who will offer me a sacrifice,
with libations cleanly prepared and well-strained, together with
the Haoma and meat? To whom shall I cleave, who cleaves unto me,
and thinks with me, and bestows gifts upon, me, and is of good
will unto me?"

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

XXX.

125.
'Offer up a sacrifice, O Spitama Zarathushtra! unto this spring
of mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita....

126.
'Ardvi Sura Anahita, who stands carried forth in the shape
of a maid, fair of body, most strong, tall-formed, high-girded,
pure, nobly born of a glorious race, wearing along her.... a mantle
fully embroidered with gold;

127.
'Ever holding the baresma in her hand, according to the rules,
she wears square golden earrings on her ears bored, and a golden
necklace around her beautiful neck, she, the nobly born Ardvi
Sura Anahita; and she girded her waist tightly, so that her breasts
may be well-shaped, that they may be tightly pressed.

128.
'Upon her head Ardvi Sura Anahita bound a golden crown, with
a hundred stars, with eight rays, a fine ...., a well-made crown,
in the shape of a ...., with fillets streaming down.

129.
'She is clothed with garments of beaver, Ardvi Sura Anahita;
with the skin of thirty beavers of those that bear four young
ones, that are the finest kind of beavers; for the skin of the
beaver that lives in water is the finest-colored of all skins,
and when worked at the right time it shines to the eye with full
sheen of silver and gold.

130. 'Here, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! I beg of
thee this favor: that I, fully blessed, may conquer large kingdoms,
rich in horses, with high tributes, with snorting horses, sounding
chariots, flashing swords, rich in aliments, with stores of food,
with well-scented beds; that I may have at my wish the fullness
of the good things of life and whatever makes a kingdom thrive.

131.
'Here, O good, most beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! I beg of
thee two gallant companions, one two-legged and one four-legged:
one two-legged, who is swift, quickly rushing, and clever in turning
a chariot round in battle; and one four-legged, who can quickly
turn towards either wing of the host with a wide front, towards
the right wing or the left, towards the left wing or the right.

132.
'Through the strength of this sacrifice, of this invocation,
O Ardvi Sura Anahita! come down from those stars, towards the
earth made by Ahura, towards the sacrificing priest, towards the
full boiling [milk]; come to help him who is offering up libations
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that thou wouldst grant
him thy favors; that all those gallant warriors may be strong,
like king Vishtaspa.

'For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

133.
'Yatha ahu vairya: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigor
of the holy water-spring Anahita.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones!'

Yt5

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 6
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt6sbe.htm
================================================================================

[

|
Khorda Avesta: Contents

|

|
Khwarshed Yasht

|

|
]

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

6. KHWARSHED YASHT ("Hymn to the Sun")

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun;

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1.

We sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun.

When the light of the sun waxes warmer, when the brightness of
the sun waxes warmer, then up stand the heavenly Yazatas, by hundreds
and thousands: they gather together its Glory, they make its Glory
pass down, they pour its Glory upon the earth made by Ahura, for
the increase of the world of holiness, for the increase of the
creatures of holiness, for the increase of the undying, shining,
swift-horsed Sun.

2.

And when the sun rises up, then the earth, made by Ahura,
becomes clean; the running waters become clean, the waters of
the wells become clean, the waters of the sea become clean, the
standing waters become clean; all the holy creatures, the creatures
of the Good Spirit, become clean.

3.

Should not the sun rise up, then the Daevas would destroy
all the things that are in the seven Karshvares, nor would the
heavenly Yazatas find any way of withstanding or repelling them
in the material world.

4.

He who offers up a sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed
Sun -- to withstand darkness, to withstand the Daevas born of darkness,
to withstand the robbers and bandits, to withstand the Yatus and
Pairikas, to withstand death that creeps in unseen -- offers it
up to Ahura Mazda, offers it up to the Amesha-Spentas, offers
it up to his own soul. He rejoices all the heavenly and worldly
Yazatas, who offers up a sacrifice unto the undying, shining,
swift-horsed Sun.

5.

I will sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who
has a thousand ears, ten thousand eyes.

I will sacrifice unto the club of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
well struck down upon the skulls of the Daevas.

I will sacrifice unto that friendship, the best of all friendships,
that reigns between the moon and the sun.

6.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed
Sun. Unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun we offer up the
libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the
tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words.

Yenghe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

7.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and the invocation, and the strength and
vigour of the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of body,
.... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy
Ones.

Go to [

|
Khorda Avesta: Contents

|

|
Khwarshed Yasht

|

|
]


================================================================================
Yasht 7
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt7sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt7sbe

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

7. MAH YASHT ("Hymn to the Moon")

This digital edition copyright © 1995 by Joseph H. Peterson.
All rights reserved.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice,prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull; unto the
only-created Bull and unto the Bull of many species;

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1.

Hail to Ahura Mazda! Hail to the Amesha-Spentas! Hail to the
Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull! Hail to thee when
we look at thee! Hail to thee when thou lookest at us!

2.

How does the moon wax? How does the moon wane?

For fifteen days does the moon wax; for fifteen days does the
moon wane. As long as her waxing, so long is the waning; as long
as her waning, so long is the waxing.

'Who is there but thee who makes the moon wax and wane?'

3.

We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the
Bull, the holy and master of holiness.

Here I look at the moon, here I perceive the moon; here I look
at the light of the moon, here I perceive the light of the moon.
The Amesha-Spentas stand up holding its glory; the Amesha-Spentas
stand up, pouring its glory upon the earth, made by Mazda.

4.

And when the light of the moon waxes warmer, golden-hued plants
grow on from the earth during the spring.

We sacrifice unto the new moons, the full moons, and the Vishaptathas.

We sacrifice unto the new moon, the holy and master of holiness;

We sacrifice unto the full moon, the holy and master of holiness;

We sacrifice unto the Vishaptatha, the holy and master of holiness.

5.

I will sacrifice unto the Moon, that keeps in it the seed
of the Bull, the liberal, bright, glorious, water-giving, warmth-giving,
wisdom-giving, wealth-giving, riches-giving, thoughtfulness-giving,
weal-giving, freshness-giving, prosperity-giving, the liberal,
the healing.

6.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer unto it a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the Moon that keeps in it the
seed of the Bull.

Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull, we offer
up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom
of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words.

Yenghe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

7.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the Moon, that keeps in it the seed of the Bull, and of the
only-created Bull, and of the Bull of many species.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.

Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of body,
.... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy
Ones.

Yt7sbe


================================================================================
Yasht 8
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt8sbe.htm
================================================================================

yt8sbe

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

8. TISHTAR YASHT (Hymn to Tishtrya)

This digital edition copyright © 1995 by
Joseph H. Peterson. All rights reserved.

, American Edition, 1898.

Tishtrya is the angel (Yazad) of the star Sirius. Tishtrya also presides over the
fourth month and the thirteenth day of each month, and also directs the rain.

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star, and unto the powerful
Satavaesa, made by Mazda, who pushes waters forward,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

NOTES:

I.

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'We worship
the lordship and mastership [of Tishtrya], whereby he protects
the Moon, the dwelling, the food, when my glorious stars come
along and impart their gifts to men. I will sacrifice unto the
star Tishtrya, that gives the fields their share [of waters].

2.
'We offer up libations unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious
star, that gives happy dwelling and good dwelling; the white,
shining, seen afar, and piercing; the health-bringing, loud-snorting,
and high, piercing from afar with its shining, undefiled rays;
and unto the waters of the wide sea, the Vanguhi of wide renown,
and the species of the Bull, made by Mazda, the awful kingly Glory,
and the Fravashi of the holy Spitama Zarathushtra.

3. 'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the star Tishtrya.

'Unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star, we offer up the
libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the
tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words.

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

II.

4. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
who is the seed of the waters, powerful, tall, and strong, whose
light goes afar; powerful and highly working, through whom the
brightness and the seed of the waters come from the high Apam
Napat.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

III.

5.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star;
for whom long flocks and herds and men, looking forward for him
and deceived in their hope: "When shall we see him rise up,
the bright and glorious star Tishtrya? When will the springs run
with waves as thick as a horse's size and still thicker? Or will
they never come?"

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

IV.

6. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious
star; who flies, towards the sea Vouru-Kasha,
as swiftly as the arrow darted through the

heavenly space
, which Erekhsha, the swift archer,
the Arya amongst the Aryas whose arrow was the swiftest, shot
from Mount Khshaotha to Mount Hvanvant.

1.
Mainivasau
=
mainyu-asau
(meaning pun
mînôî
jîvâkîh, svargasthânam
,
Yasna 57.27.

7.
'For Ahura Mazda gave him assistance; so did the waters and
the plants; and Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, opened a wide
way unto him.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

V.

8.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
that afflicts the Pairikas, that vexes the Pairikas, who, in the
shape of worm-stars, fly between the earth and the heavens, in
the sea Vouru-Kasha, the powerful sea, the large-sized, deep sea
of salt waters. He goes to its lake in the shape of a horse, in
a holy shape; and down there he makes the waters boil over, and
the winds flow above powerfully all around.

9.
'Then Satavaesa makes those waters flow down to the seven
Karshvares of the earth, and when he has arrived down there, he
stands, beautiful, spreading ease and joy on the fertile countries
(thinking in himself): "How shall the countries of the Aryas
grow fertile?"

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

VI.

10.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
who spoke unto Ahura Mazda, saying: "Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

11.
'"If men would worship me with a sacrifice in which I
were invoked by my own name, as they worship the other Yazatas
with sacrifices in which they are invoked by their own names,
then I should have come to the faithful at the appointed time;
I should have come in the appointed time of my beautiful, immortal
life, should it be one night, or two nights, or fifty, or a hundred
nights."

12.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya;

'We sacrifice unto the rains of Tishtrya.

'We sacrifice unto the first star; we sacrifice unto the rains
of the first star.

'I will sacrifice unto the stars Haptoiringa, to oppose the Yatus
and Pairikas.

'We sacrifice unto Vanant, the star made by Mazda; for the well-shapen
strength, for the Victory, made by Ahura, for the crushing Ascendant,
for the destruction of what distresses us, for the destruction
of what persecutes us.

'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, whose eye-sight is sound.

13.
'For ten nights, O Spitama Zarathushtra! Tishtrya, the bright
and glorious star, mingles his shape with light, moving in the
shape of a man of fifteen years of age, bright, with clear eyes,
tall, full of strength, strong, and clever.

14.
'He is active as the first man was; he goes on with the strength
of the first man; he has the virility of the first man.

15.
'Here he calls for people to assemble, here he asks, saying:
"Who now will offer me the libations with the Haoma and the
holy meat? To whom shall I give wealth of male children, a troop
of male children, and the purification of his own soul? Now I
ought to receive sacrifice and prayer in the material world, by
the law of excellent holiness."

16.
'The next ten nights, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the bright and
glorious Tishtrya mingles his shape with light, moving in the
shape of a golden-horned bull.

17.
'Here he calls for people to assemble, here he asks, saying:
"Who now will offer me the libations with the Haoma and the
holy meat? To whom shall I give wealth of oxen, a herd of oxen,
and the purification of his own soul? Now I ought to receive sacrifice
and prayer in the material world, by the law of excellent holiness."

18.
'The next ten nights, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the bright and
glorious Tishtrya mingles his shape with light, moving in the
shape of a white, beautiful horse, with golden ears and a golden
caparison.

19.
'Here he calls for people to assemble, here he asks, saying:
"Who now will offer me the libations with the Haoma and the
holy meat? To whom shall I give wealth of horses, a troop of horses,
and the purification of his own soul? Now I ought to receive sacrifice
and prayer in the material world, by the law of excellent holiness."

20.
'Then, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the bright and glorious Tishtrya
goes down to the sea Vouru-Kasha in the shape of a white, beautiful
horse, with golden ears and a golden caparison.

21.
'But there rushes down to meet him the Daeva Apaosha, in the
shape of a dark horse, black with black ears, black with a black
back, black with a black tail, stamped with brands of terror.

22.
'They meet together, hoof against hoof, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
the bright and glorious Tishtrya and the Daeva Apaosha. They fight
together, O Spitama Zarathushtra! for three days and three nights.
And then the Daeva Apaosha proves stronger than the bright and
glorious Tishtrya, he overcomes him.

23.
'And Tishtrya flees from the sea Vouru-Kasha, as far as a
Hathra's length. He cries out in woe and distress, the bright
and glorious Tishtrya: "Woe is me, O Ahura Mazda! I am in
distress, O Waters and Plants! O Fate and thou, Law of the worshippers
of Mazda! Men do not worship me with a sacrifice in which I am
invoked by my own name, as they worship the other Yazatas with
sacrifices in which they are invoked by their own names.

24.
'"If men had worshipped me with a sacrifice in which
I had been invoked by my own name, as they worship the other Yazatas
with sacrifices in which they are invoked by their own names,
I should have taken to me the strength of ten horses, the strength
of ten camels, the strength of ten bulls, the strength of ten
mountains, the strength of ten rivers."

25.
'Then I, Ahura Mazda, offer up to the bright and glorious
Tishtrya a sacrifice in which he is invoked by his own name, and
I bring him the strength of ten horses, the strength of ten camels,
the strength of ten bulls, the strength of ten mountains, the
strength of ten rivers.

26.
'Then, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the bright and glorious Tishtrya
goes down to the sea Vouru-Kasha in the shape of a white, beautiful
horse, with golden ears and golden caparison.

27.
'But there rushes down to meet him the Daeva Apaosha in the
shape of a dark horse, black with black ears, black with a black
back, black with a black tail, stamped with brands of terror.

28.
'They meet together, hoof against hoof, O Spitama Zarathushtra!
the bright and glorious Tishtrya, and the Daeva Apaosha; they
fight together, O Zarathushtra! till the time of noon. Then the
bright and glorious Tishtrya proves stronger than the Daeva Apaosha,
he overcomes him.

29.
'Then he goes from the sea Vouru-Kasha as far as a Hathra's
length: "Hail!" cries the bright and glorious Tishtrya.
"Hail unto me, O Ahura Mazda! Hail unto you, O waters and
plants! Hail, O Law of the worshippers of Mazda! Hail will it
be unto you, O lands! The life of the waters will flow down unrestrained
to the big-seeded corn fields, to the small-seeded pasture-fields,
and to the whole of the material world!"

30.
Then the bright and glorious Tishtrya goes back down to the
sea Vouru-Kasha, in the shape of a white, beautiful horse, with
golden ears and a golden caparison.

31.
'He makes the sea boil up and down; he makes the sea stream
this and that way; he makes the sea flow this and that way: all
the shores of the sea Vouru-Kasha are boiling over, all the middle
of it is boiling over.

32.
'And the bright and glorious Tishtrya rises up from the sea
Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the bright and glorious Satavaesa
rises up from the sea Vouru-Kasha; and vapours rise up above Mount
Us-hindu, that stands in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha.

33.
'Then the vapours push forward, in the regular shape of clouds;
they go following the wind, along the ways which Haoma traverses,
the increaser of the world. Behind him travels the mighty wind,
made by Mazda, and the rain, and the cloud, and the sleet, down
to the several places, down to the fields, down to the seven Karshvares
of the earth.

34.
'Apam Napat, O Spitama Zarathushtra! divides the waters amongst
the countries in the material world, in company with the mighty
wind, the Glory, made by the waters, and the Fravashis of the
faithful.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

VII.

35.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
who from the shining east, moves along his long winding course,
along the path made by the gods, along the way appointed for him
the watery way, at the will of Ahura Mazda, at the will of the
Amesha-Spentas.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

VIII.

36.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
whose rising is watched by men who live on the fruits of the year,
by the chiefs of deep understanding; by the wild beasts in the
mountains, by the tame beasts that run in the plains; they watch
him, as he comes up to the country for a bad year, or for a good
year, (thinking in themselves): "How shall the Aryan countries
be fertile?"

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

IX.

37.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
swift-flying and swift-moving, who flies towards the sea Vouru-Kasha,
as swiftly as the arrow darted through the heavenly space, which
Erekhsha, the swift archer, the Arya amongst the Aryas whose arrow
was the swiftest, shot from Mount Khshaotha to Mount Hvanvant.

38.
'Ahura Mazda gave him assistance, and the Amesha-Spentas and
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, pointed him the way: behind
him went the tall Ashish Vanguhi and Parendi on her light chariot:
always till, in his course, he reached Mount Hvanvant on the shining
waters.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

X.

39.
'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
who afflicts the Pairikas, who destroys the Pairikas, that Angra
Mainyus flung to stop all the stars that have in them the seed
of the waters.

40.
'Tishtrya afflicts them, he blows them away from the sea Vouru-Kasha;
then the wind blows the clouds forward, bearing the waters of
fertility, so that the friendly showers spread wide over, they
spread helpingly and friendly over the seven Karshvares.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XI.

41. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
for whom long the standing waters, and the running spring-waters,
the stream-waters, and the rain-waters:

42.
'"When will the bright and glorious Tishtrya rise up
for us? When will the springs with a flow and overflow of waters,
thick as a horse's shoulder, run to the beautiful places and fields,
and to the pastures, even to the roots of the plants, that they
may grow with a powerful growth?"

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XII.

43. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
who washes away all things of fear, who stunts the growth of all
...., and brings health to all these creations, being most beneficent,
when he has been worshipped with a sacrifice and propitiated,
rejoiced, and satisfied.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XIII.

44. 'I will sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
whom Ahura Mazda has established as a lord and overseer above
all stars, in the same way as he has established Zarathushtra
above men; whom neither Angra Mainyu, nor the Yatus and the Pairikas,
nor the men Yatus can deliver unto death, nor can all the Daevas
together prevail for his death.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XIV.

45. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
to whom Ahura Mazda has given a thousand senses, and who is the
most beneficent amongst the stars that have in them the seed of
the waters:

46. 'Who moves in light with the stars that have in them the seed
of the waters: he, from the sea Vouru-Kasha, the powerful sea,
the large-sized, deep, and salt of waters, goes to all the lakes,
and to all the beautiful caves, and to all the beautiful channels,
in the shape of a white, beautiful horse, with golden ears and
a golden caparison.

47.
'Then, O Spitama Zarathushtra! the waters flow down from the
sea Vouru-Kasha, mother-like, friendly, and healing: he divides
them amongst these countries, being most beneficent, when he has
been worshipped with a sacrifice and propitiated rejoiced, and
satisfied. 'For his brigbtness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

XV.

48. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
for whom long all the creatures of Spenta-Mainyu, those that live
under the ground, and those that live above the ground; those
that live in the waters, and those that live on dry land; those
that fly, and those that run in the plains; and all those that
live within this boundless and endless world of the holy Spirit.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XVI.

49. 'We sacrifice unto Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star,
the healthful, wise, happy, and powerful, who is the lord of a
thousand boons, and grants many boons to that man who has pleased
him, whether begging or not begging for them.

50. 'I, O Spitama Zarathushtra! have created that star Tishtrya
as worthy of sacrifice, as worthy of prayer, as worthy of propitiation,
as worthy of glorification as myself, Ahura Mazda;

51.
'In order to withstand, to break asunder, to afflict, to drive
back the malice of that Pairika Duzyairya, whom evil-speaking
people call Huyairya.

52.
'Had I not created that star Tishtrya as worthy of sacrifice,
as worthy of prayer, as worthy of propitiation, as worthy of glorification
as myself, Ahura Mazda;

53.
'In order to withstand, to break asunder, to afflict, to drive
back the malice of that Pairika Duzyairya, whom evil-speaking
people call Huyairya;

54.
'Then all day long, all night long, that Pairika Duzyairya
would wage war against this material world of mine, wanting to
extinguish its life, and she goes on, rushing upon and around
it.

55.
'But the bright and glorious Tishtrya keeps that Pairika in
bonds, with twofold bonds, with threefold bonds, that cannot be
overcome, with bonds all over the body: it is as if there were
a thousand men keeping one man in bonds, a thousand men of those
who are the strongest in strength.

56.
'If the Aryan countries, O Spitama Zarathushtra! would perform
in honour of the bright and glorious Tishtrya the due sacrifice
and invocation, just as that sacrifice and invocation ought to
be performed in the perfection of holiness; never should a hostile
horde enter these Aryan countries, nor any plague, nor leprosy,
nor venomous plants, nor the chariot of a foe, nor the uplifted
spear of a foe.'

57.
Zarathushtra asked: 'What is then, O Ahura Mazda! the sacrifice
and invocation in honour of the bright and glorious Tishtrya,
as it ought to be performed in the perfection of holiness?'

58.
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let the Aryan nations bring libations
unto him; let the Aryan nations tie bundles of baresma for him;
let the Aryan nations cook for him a head of cattle, either white,
or black, or of any other colour, but all of one and the same
colour.

59.
'Let not a murderer take of these offerings, nor a whore,
nor a .... who does not sing the Gathas, who spreads death in
the world and withstands the law of Mazda, the law of Zarathushtra.

60.
'If a murderer take of these offerings, or a whore, or a ....
who does not sing the Gathas, who spreads death in the world and
withstands the law of Mazda, the law of Zarathushtra, then the
bright and glorious Tishtrya takes back his healing virtues.

61.
'Plagues will ever pour upon the Aryan nations; hostile hordes
will ever fall upon the Aryan nations; the Aryans will be smitten,
by their fifties and their hundreds, by their hundreds and their
thousands, by thetr thousands and their tens of thousands, by
their tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads.

62. 'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of Tishtrya, the bright and glorious star, and of the powerful
Satavaesa, made by Mazda, who pushes waters forward.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.'

yt8sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 9
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt9sbe.htm
================================================================================

yt9sbe

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

9. GOSH YASHT (Drvasp Yasht).

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

For an
audio recording
, please see

Soli Dastur's youtube channel.
.

0.
May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! May Angra Mainyu be afflicted!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, satisfaction, and glorification unto Havani,
the holy and master of holiness.

Unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and holy,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1.
We sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and
holy, who heeps the flocks in health, the herds in health, the
grown-up (cattle) in health, the young ones in health; who watches
well from afar, with a wide-spread and long-continued welfare-giving
friendship;

2.
Who yokes teams of horses, who makes her chariot turn and
its wheels sound, fat and glistening, strong, tall-formed, weal-possessing,
health-giving, powerful to stand and powerful to turn for assistance
to the faithful.

3.
To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradhata, offer up a sacrifice
on the enclosure of the Hara, the beautiful height, made by Mazda,
with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, and ten thousand
lambs, and with an offering of libations:

4.
'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! that
I may overcome all the Daevas of Mazana; that I may never fear
and bow through terror before the Daevas, but that all the Daevas
may fear and bow in spite of themselves before me, that they may
fear and flee down to darkness.'

5.
The powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvaspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant
him that boon.

6.
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice
worth being heard; I will offer her a sacrifice well performed,
namely, unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and holy. We
offer up libations to the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and
holy; we offer her the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom
of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words.

Yenghe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

7.
We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by
Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health....

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful.

8.
To her did Yima Khshaeta, the good shepherd, offer up a sacrifice
from the height Hukairya, with a hundred male horses, a thousand
oxen, ten thousand lambs, and with an offering of libations:

9.
'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! that
I may bring fatness and flocks down to the world created by Mazda;
that I may bring immortality down to the world created by Mazda;

10.
'That I may take away both hunger and thirst, from the world
created by Mazda; that I may take away both old age and death,
from the world created by Mazda; that I may take away both hot
wind and cold wind, from the world created by Mazda, for a thousand
years.'

11.
The powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvaspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering lipbations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant
him that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

12.
We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by
Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health....

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful.

13.
To her did Thraetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya clan,
offer up a sacrifice in the four-cornered Varena, with a hundred
male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and with an
offering of libations:

14.
'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! that
I may overcome Azhi Dahaka, the three-mouthed, the three-headed,
the six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that most powerful, fiendish
Druj, that demon, baleful to the world, the strongest Druj that
Angra Mainyu created against the material world, to destroy the
world of the good principle; and that I may deliver his two wives,
Savanghavack and Erenavach, who are the fairest of body amongst
women, and the most wonderful creatures in the world.'

15.
The powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvasya, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant
him that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

16.
We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by
Mazda and holy, who keeps flocks in health....

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful.

17.
To her did Haoma offer up a sacrifice, Haoma, the enlivening,
the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes, upon
the highest height of the Haraiti Bareza. He begged of her a boon
saying:

18.
'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! that
I may bind the Turanian murderer Franghrasyan, that I may drag
him bound, that may bring him bound unto king Husravah, that king
Husravah may kill him, behind the Chaechasta lake, the deep lake
of salt waters, to avenge the murder of his father Syavarshana,
a man, and of Aghraeratha, a semi-man.'

19.
The powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvaspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would give
him that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

20.
We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by
Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health....

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful.

21.
To her did the gallant Husravah, he who united the Arya nations
into one kingdom, offer up a sacrifice, behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake of salt waters, with a hundred male horses,
a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and an offering of libations:

22.
'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! that
I may kill the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan, behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder of my
father Syavarshana, a man, and of Aghraeratha, a semi-man.'

23.
The powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvaspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant
him that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

24.
We offer up a sacrifice unlo the powerful Drvaspa, made by
Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health....

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful,

25.
To her did the holy Zarathushtra offer up a sacrifice in the
Airyana Vaejah, by the good river Daitya, with the Haoma and meat,
with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy
spells, with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations, and
with the rightly-spoken words. He begged of her a boon, saying:

26.
'O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! grant me this boon, that
I may bring the good and noble Hutaosa to think according to the
law, to speak according to the law, to do according to the law,
that she may spread my Mazdean law and make it known, and that
she may bestow beautiful praises upon my deeds.'

27.
The strong Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvaspa, the maintainer,
granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations, giving
gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that
boon.

For her brightness and glory, I wiII offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

28.
We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvaspa, made by
Mazda and holy, who keeps the flocks in health....

Who yokes teams of horses .... for assistance to the faithful.

29.
To her did the tall Kavi Vistaspa offer up a sacrifice behind
the waters of the river Daitya, with a hundred male horses, a
thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and with an offering of libations:

30.
'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvaspa! that
I may put to flight Ashta-aurvant, the son of Vispa-thaurvo-asti,
the all-afflicting, of the brazen helmet, of the brazen armour,
of the thick neck, behind whom seven hundred camels ....; that
I may put to flight the Hvyaona murderer, Arejat-aspa; that I
may put to flight Darshinika, the worshipper of the Daevas;

31.
And that I may smite Tathravant of the bad law; that I may
smite Spinjaurushka, the worshipper of the Daevas; and that I
may bring unto the good law the nations of the Varedhakas and
of the Hvyaonas; and that I may smite of the Huyaona nations their
fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands,
their thousands and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands
and their myriads of myriads.

32.
The strong Drvaspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvaspa, the maintainer,
granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations, giving
gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that
boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard; I will offer her a sacrifice well performed, namely,
unto the powerful Drvaspa made by Mazda and holy. We offer up
libations to the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and holy; we
offer her the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the tongue,
the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations, and the
rightly-spoken words.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the powerful Drvaspa, made by Mazda and holy.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body,.... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.

yt9sbe


================================================================================
Yasht 10
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt10sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt10

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

10. MIHR YASHT ("Hymn to Mithra")

This digital edition copyright © 1995 by Joseph H. Peterson.
All rights reserved.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

Spelling has been normalized to conform with other texts in this series.

This Yasht, one of the longest of the Avesta and one of the most
interesting in a literary point of view, is not very instructive for
mythology. It consists of long descriptive pieces, sometimes
rather spirited, and of fervent prayers and invocations for mercy
or protection. Originally Mithra was the god of the heavenly light
(§§ 12, 50, 67, 104, 124 seq., 136 seq., etc.); and in that character
he knows the truth, as he sees everything; he is therefore taken
as a witness of truth, he is the preserver of oaths and good faith
(§§ 2, 44 seq., 79 seq., 81 seq., etc.); he chastises those who break
their promises and lie to Mithra, destroys their houses, and smites
them in battle (§§ 17 seq., 28 seq., 35 seq., 47 seq., 99 seq., 105 seq.,
112 seq., 128 seq., etc.).

Particularly interesting are §§ 115-118, as giving a sketch of
moral hierarchy in Iran, and §§ 121-122, as being perhaps the
source of the trials in the later Roman Mithraism. Cf. Vend.
Intro. IV, 8 and
Ormazd et Ahriman
, §§ 59-61.

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas, and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Notes:

Unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who has a
thousand ears, ten thousand eyes, a Yazata invoked
by his own name, and unto Rama Hvastra,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation,
and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1. Sirozah 1.16.

I.

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra,
saying: 'Verily, when I created Mithra, the lord of

wide pastures, O Spitama! I created him as worthy
of sacrifice, as worthy of prayer as myself, Ahura Mazda.

2. Cf. Yt8.50.

2. 'The ruffian who lies unto Mithra
brings death
unto the whole country, injuring as much the faithful
world as a hundred evil-doers
could do. Break not
the contract, O Spitama! neither the one that thou
hadst entered into with one of the unfaithful, nor the
one that thou hadst entered into with one of the
faithful who is one of thy own faith.
For Mithra
stands for both the faithful and the unfaithful.

3. The Mithra-druj: one might also translate 'who breaks the
contract,' as mithra, as a common noun, means 'a contract.'

4. Kayadhas; cf Yt1.19.

5. Cf.
Arda Viraf, chap. 52.

3. 'Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, gives swiftness
to the horses of those who lie not unto
Mithra.

'Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda, gives the straightest
way to those who lie not unto Mithra.

'The good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the
faithful give a virtuous offspring to those who lie
not unto Mithra.

4. 'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto
him a sacrifice worth being heard, namely, unto
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures.

'We offer up libations unto Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures, who gives a happy dwelling and a
good dwelling to the Aryan nations.

5. 'May he come to us for help! May he come
to us for ease! May he come to us for joy! May
he come to us for mercy! May he come to us for
health! May he come to us for victory! May he

come to us for good conscience!
May he come to
us for bliss!
he, the awful and overpowering, worthy
of sacrifice and prayer, not to be deceived anywhere
in the whole of the material world, Mithra, the lord
of wide pastures.

6. Cheerfulness at the head of the Chinwad bridge (
Yasna 62.6

[61.17]; cf.
Vend. 18.6
).

7. The condition of the blessed in the next world.

6. 'I will offer up libations unto him, the strong
Yazata, the powerful Mithra, most beneficent to the
creatures: I will apply unto him with charity
and
prayers: I will offer up a sacrifice worth being heard
unto him, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, with the
Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the wisdom
of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the
speech, with the deeds, with the libations, and with
the rightly-spoken words.

8.
Vanta
, 'assistance, that is, making
jâdangôi
' (Yasna 62.1);

jâdangôi
is making a collection for the poor (Études
Iraniennes, II, 155.)

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

9. As Yt1.22. [Yenghe Hatam prayer is imitated from

Y51.22.
]

II.

7. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide
pastures, who is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies,
with a thousand ears, well-shapen, with ten thousand eyes,
high, with full knowledge,
strong, sleepless,
and ever awake;

10.
Perethu-vaêdhayana
:
sampûrnavittâram kâryanyâyânam

Ny1.6

11.
jaghhâurvaunghem
: this word, strangely enough, is generally
translated 'who has most strong arms' (
balishthabhujam
);
jagâuru

is translated in the same way.

8. 'To whom the chiefs of nations offer up sacrifices,
as they go to the field, against havocking hosts,
against enemies coming in battle array, in the strife
of conflicting nations.

9. 'On whichever side he has been worshipped
first in the fulness of faith of a devoted heart, to that
side turns Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, with
the fiend-smiting wind, with the cursing thought
of the wise.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

12. Sr1.30. 'The blessing (
âfriti
) is twofold: one by thought, one by
words; the blessing by words is more powerful; the curse
(
upamana
) in thought is the more powerful' (Neriosengh ad
Yasna I.15). Upamana is the same as the Vedic manyu.

III.

10. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake.

11. 'Whom the horsemen worship on the back
of their horses, begging swiftness for their teams,
health for their own bodies, and that they may watch
with full success those who hate them, smite down
their foes, and destroy at one stroke their adversaries,
their enemies, and those who hate them.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

13. Cf.
Yt5.53
;
Yt10.94.

IV.

12.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

13. 'Who first of the heavenly gods reaches over
the Hara
, before
the undying, swift-horsed sun
;

who, foremost in a golden array, takes hold of the
beautiful summits, and from thence looks over the
abode of the Aryans with a beneficent eye.

14. Mount Alburz, whence the sun rises; see § 50.

15. Mithra is closely connected with the sun, but not yet identical
with it, as he became in later times (Pers.
mhr
, the sun;
Deo invicto Soli Mithrae).

14. 'Where the valiant chiefs draw up their many
troops in array;
where the high mountains, rich in
pastures and waters, yield plenty to the cattle;

where the deep lakes, with salt waters, stand;

where wide-flowing rivers swell and hurry towards
Ishkata and Pouruta, Mouru and Haroyu, the Gava-Sughdha
and Hvairizem;

16. In the flat countries.

17. In the mountainous parts of Iran.

18. In the lake regions (Seistan, Farsistan, Adarbaijan [Azarbaijan]).
19. In the country of the large rivers in the East. Mouru is Marv
(Margiana), with the Murghab river (the Margus); Haroyu is the
Herat country, with the Hararud; Gava-Sugdha and Hvarizm are
Sogdiana and Khwarizm, with the Oxus. The situation of Ishkata
and Pouruta is not clear: one might think of Alexander eschata
on the Iaxartes and the Paretacene country between the Oxus
and the Iaxartes.

15. 'On Arezahi and Sawahi, on Fradadhafshu
and Widadhafshu, on Wouru-bareshti and Wourujareshti,
on this bright karshwar of Xwaniratha
, the abode
of cattle, the dwelling of cattle, the powerful Mithra
looks with a health-bringing eye;

20. The earth is divided into seven karshwars, separated from one
another by seas and mountains impassable to men. Arezahi and
Sawahi are the western and the eastern karshwars; Fradadhafshu
and Widadhafshu are in the south; Wouru-bareshti and Wourujareshti
are in the north; Xwaniratha is the central karshwar. Zwaniratha
is the only karshwar inhabited by man (
Bundahishn
11.3
).

16. 'He who moves along all the karshwars, a
Yazata unseen, and brings glory; he who moves
along all the karshwars, a Yazata unseen, and
brings sovereignty; and increases
strength for

victory to those who, with a pious intent, holily
offer him libations.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

21. Doubtful.

V.

17. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Unto whom nobody must lie, neither the master
of a house, nor the lord of a borough, nor the lord
of a town, nor the lord of a province.

18. 'If the master of a house lies unto him, or the
lord of a borough, or the lord of a town, or the lord
of a province, then comes Mithra, angry and offended,
and he breaks asunder the house, the borough, the
town, the province; and the masters of the houses,
the lords of the boroughs, the lords of the towns,
the lords of the provinces, and the foremost men
of the provinces.

19. 'On whatever side there is one who has lied
unto Mithra, on that side Mithra stands forth, angry
and offended, and his wrath
is slow to relent.

22.
Mainyu
, in the meaning of the Sanskrit
manyu
(?).

23. Doubtful;
aspachat
: cf. [Pers.]
spuxtn
, to be late.

20. 'Those who lie unto Mithra, however swift
they may be running, cannot overtake;
riding,
cannot ....; driving, cannot ..... The spear that
the foe of Mithra flings, darts backwards, for the

number of the evil spells that the foe of Mithra
works out.

24.
Apayêinti, frastanvainti, framayêintê
: these are three
technical words for the movements of the three classes of soldiers,
footmen, horsemen, and chariot-men; the last two words are
probably synonymous with the first, but the exact shades of meaning
are not known. Mr. West suggests, cannot outrun, outride,
outdrive him.

25. The sacramental words of the contract, by their not being
kept, turn to evil spells against the contract-breaker.

21. 'And even though the spear be flung well,
even though it reach the body, it makes no wound,
for the number of the evil spells that the foe of
Mithra works out.
The wind drives away the
spear that the foe of Mithra flings, for the number
of the evil spells that the foe of Mithra works out.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

26. The sacramental words of the contract, by their not being
kept, turn to evil spells against the contract-breaker.

VI.

22. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who takes out of distress the man who has not
lied unto him, who takes him out of death.

23. 'Take us out of distress, take us out of distresses,
O Mithra! as we have not lied unto thee.
Thou bringest down terror upon the bodies of the
men who lie unto Mithra; thou takest away the
strength from their arms, being angry and all-powerful;
thou takest the swiftness from their feet, the
eye-sight from their eyes, the hearing from their
ears.

24. 'Not the wound
of the well-sharpened spear
or of the flying
arrow reaches that man to whom Mithra comes for help with all
the strength of his soul, he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful,
all-seeing, undeceivable Mithra.

27. Doubtful:
shanamayô
, or
shanamaoyô
; read
shanmaoyô
(?),
from
shan
, Sansk.
kshan
.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

VII.

25. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who is lordly, deep, strong, and weal-giving;
a chief in assemblies, pleased with prayers,
high,
holily clever, the incarnate Word, a warrior with
strong arms;

28.
Vahmô-sendah
; cf. Visperad 8 (IX, 1), Phl. tr.

26. 'Who breaks the skulls of the Daevas, and is
most cruel in exacting pains; the punisher of the
men who lie unto Mithra, the withstander of the
Pairikas; who, when not deceived, establisheth
nations in supreme strength; who, when not deceived,
establisheth nations in supreme victory;

27. 'Who confounds the ways of the nation that
delights in havoc, who turns away their Glory,
takes
away their strength for victory, blows them away
helpless,
and delivers them unto ten thousand
strokes; he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful,
all-seeing, undeceivable Mithra.

29. Their
khwarenah
[khwarrah].

30. Doubtful.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

VIII.

28. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who upholds the columns of the lofty house and
makes its pillars
solid; who gives herds of oxen and
male children to that house in which he has been
satisfied; he breaks to pieces those in which he has
been offended.

31.
Ãithya
; cf. Lat.
antae
(Brugmann).

29. 'Thou, O Mithra! art both bad and good to

nations; thou, O Mithra! art both bad and good
to men; thou, O Mithra! keepest in thy hands both
peace and trouble for nations.

30. 'Thou makest houses large, beautiful with
women, beautiful with chariots, with well-laid foundations,

and high above their groundwork;
thou
makest that house lofty, beautiful with women,
beautiful with chariots, with well-laid foundations,
and high above its groundwork, of which the master,
pious and holding libations in his hand, offers thee
a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy own
name and with the proper words.

32. Doubtful.

33. Doubtful.

31. 'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked
by thy own name, with the proper words will I offer
thee libations, O powerful Mithra!

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by
thy own name, with the proper words will I offer
thee libations, O most beneficent Mithra!

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by
thy own name, with the proper words will I offer
thee libations, O thou undeceivable Mithra!

32. 'Listen unto our sacrifice,
O Mithra! Be
thou pleased with our sacrifice, O Mithra! Come
and sit at our sacrifice! Accept our libations!
Accept them as they have been consecrated!

Gather them together with love and lay them in
the Garo-nmana!
.

34. Cf.
Yt3.18.

35. By the proper prayers (
yashtau
).

36. [
garothman, i.e.
Heaven. -JHP]

33. 'Grant us these boons which we beg of thee,
O powerful god! in accordance
with the words of
revelation, namely, riches, strength, and victory,
good conscience and bliss,
good fame and a good

soul; wisdom and the knowledge that gives happiness,

the victorious strength given by Ahura, the
crushing Ascendant of Asha Vahishta, and conversation
(with God) on the Holy Word.

37. Doubtful.

38. Cf. § 5.

39. Spiritual happiness, bliss.

40.
Vd18.51 [III].

34. 'Grant that we, in a good spirit and high spirit,
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all our
foes; that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, exalted
in joy and a good spirit, may smite all our enemies;
that we, in a good spirit and high spirit, exalted in
joy and a good spirit, may smite all the malice of
Daevas and Men, of the Yatus and Pairikas, of the
oppressors, the blind, and the deaf.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

41. See above,
Yt1.10, note 3
. §§ 30-34 = §§56-59.

IX.

35. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Victory-making
, army-governing, endowed with
a thousand senses
; power-wielding, power-possessing,
and all-knowing;

42. Doubtful (reading
arenat-jaêsha
?).

43. See
§ 82, note.

36. 'Who sets the battle a going, who stands
against (armies) in battle, who, standing against
(armies) in battle, breaks asunder the lines arrayed.
The wings of the columns gone to battle shake, and
he throws terror upon the centre of the havocking
host.

37. 'He can bring and does bring down upon
them distress and fear; he throws down the heads
of those who lie to Mithra, he takes off the
heads of those who lie unto Mithra.

38. 'Sad is the abode, unpeopled with children,
where abide men who lie unto Mithra, and, verily,
the fiendish killer of faithful men. The grazing cow
goes a sad straying way, driven along the vales
of
the Mithradrujes: they
stand on the road, letting
tears run over their chins
.

44. Doubtful.

45. The cattle.

46. The meaning is, that the cattle of the Mithradrujes do not
thrive, and that their pasture fields are waste.

39. 'Their falcon-feathered arrows, shot from the
string of the well-bent bow, fly towards the mark, and
hit it not, as Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, angry,
offended, and unsatisfied, comes and meets them.

'Their spears, well whetted and sharp, their long
spears fly from their hands towards the mark, and
hit it not, as Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, angry,
offended, and unsatisfied, comes and meets them.

40. 'Their swords, well thrust and striking at the
heads of men, hit not the mark, as Mithra, the lord
of wide pastures, angry, offended, and unsatisfied,
comes and meets them.

'Their clubs, well falling and striking at the heads
of men, hit not the mark, as Mithra, the lord of wide
pastures, angry, offended, and unsatisfied, comes and
meets them.

41. 'Mithra strikes fear into them; Rashnu

strikes a counter-fear into them
; the holy Sraosha
blows them away from every side towards the two
Yazatas, the maintainers of the world.
They make
the ranks of the army melt away, as Mithra, the lord

of wide pastures, angry, offended, and unsatisfied,
comes and meets them.

47. See
Yt12.

48. As they flee from Mithra, they fall into the hands of Rashnu.

49.
Thrâtâra
; one might feel inclined to read
thrâstâra
, 'the
fear-striking;' cf.
§ 36.

50. Cf.
§ 99-101

42. 'They cry unto Mithra, the lord of wide
pastures, saying: "O Mithra, thou lord of wide pastures!
here are our fiery horses taking us away, as
they flee from Mithra; here are our sturdy arms cut
to pieces by the sword, O Mithra!"

43. 'And then Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
throws them to the ground, killing their fifties and
their hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands,
their thousands and their tens of thousands, their
tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads;
as Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, is angry and
offended.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

X.

44. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Whose dwelling, wide as the earth, extends over
the material world, large
, unconfined
, and bright,
a far-and-wide-extending abode.

51. Doubtful. The text is corrupt.

45. 'Whose eight friends
sit as spies for Mithra,
on all the heights, at all the watching-places, observing
the man who lies unto Mithra, looking at those,
remembering those who have lied unto Mithra, but
guarding the ways of those whose life is sought by

men who lie unto Mithra, and, verily, by the fiendish
killers of faithful men.

52. Doubtful. The number eight has probably an astronomical
signification, each of the eight râtis of Mithra occupying one of
the eight points of the compass.

46. 'Helping and guarding, guarding behind and
guarding in front, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
proves an undeceivable spy and watcher for the man
to whom he comes to help with all the strength of
his soul, he of the ten thousand spies, the powerful,
all-knowing, undeceivable god.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XI.

47. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'A god of high renown and old age
, whom wide-hoofed
horses carry against havocking hosts, against
enemies coming in battle array, in the strife of conflicting
nations
.

53. Doubtful.

54. Cf.
§ 8.

48. 'And when Mithra drives along towards the havocking hosts,
towards the enemies coming in battle array, in the strife of the
conflicting nations, then he binds the hands of those who have
lied unto Mithra, he confounds their eye-sight, he takes the
hearing from their ears; they can no longer move
their feet; they can no longer withstand those
people, those foes, when Mithra, the lord of wide
pastures, bears them ill-will.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XII.

49. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

50. 'For whom the Maker, Ahura Mazda, has

built up a dwelling on the Hara Berezaiti, the bright
mountain around which the many (stars) revolve
,
where come neither night nor darkness, no cold
wind and no hot wind, no deathful sickness, no uncleanness
made by the Daevas, and the clouds
cannot reach up unto the Haraiti Bareza
;

55.
Bundahishn
5.3 seq.
;
cf.
Yt12.13#section5
and
Yt10.13.

56. The Haraiti Bareza is the same as Hara Berezaiti.

51. 'A dwelling that all the Amesha-Spentas, in
one accord with the sun, made for him in the fulness
of faith of a devoted heart, and he survevs the whole
of the material world from the Haraiti Bareza.

52. 'And when there rushes a wicked worker of
evil, swiftly, with a swift step, Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures, goes and yokes his horses to his
chariot, along with the holy, powerful Sraosha and
Nairyo-sangha,
who strikes a blow that smites the
army, that smites the strength of the malicious.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

57.
Sirozah 1.9, notes 4 and 5.

58. Doubtful (
mâyaosh
).

XIII.

53. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

54. 'Who, with hands lifted up, ever cries unto
Ahura Mazda, saying: "I am the kind keeper of all
creatures, I am the kind maintainer of all creatures;
yet men worship me not with a sacrifice in which
I am invoked by my own name, as they worship the
other gods with sacrifices in which they are invoked
by their own names.

54. '"If men would worship me with a sacrifice

in which I were invoked by my own name, as they
worship the other Yazatas with sacrifices in which
they are invoked by their own names, then I would
come to the faithful at the appointed time; I would
come in the appointed time of my beautiful, immortal
life."

59. Cf.
Yt8.11, 24
, and
Yt10.74.

59. 'But the pious man, holding libations in his
hands, does worship thee with a sacrifice, in which
thou art invoked by thy own name, and with the
proper words.

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy
own name, with the proper words will I offer thee
libations, O powerful Mithra!

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy
own name, with the proper words will I offer thee
libations, O most beneficent Mithra!

'With a sacrifice, in which thou art invoked by thy
own name, with the proper words will I offer thee
libations, O thou undeceivable Mithra!

60. §§ 56-59 = §§ 30-34.

57. 'Listen unto our sacrifice, 'O Mithra! Be thou
pleased with our sacrifice, O Mithra! Come and sit
at our sacrifice! Accept our libations! Accept them
as they have been consecrated! Gather them together
with love and lay them in the Garo-nmana [Garothman
i.e.
Heaven]!

58. 'Grant us these boons which we beg of thee,
O powerful god! in accordance with the words of
revelation, namely, riches, strength, and victory,
good conscience and bliss, good fame and a good
soul; wisdom and the knowledge that gives happiness,
the victorious strength given by Ahura, the
crushing Ascendant of Asha-Vahishta, and conversation
(with God) on the Holy Word.

59. 'Grant that we, in a good spirit and high spirit,
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all our
foes; that we, in a good spirit and high spirit,
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all
our enemies; that we, in a good spirit and high spirit,
exalted in joy and a good spirit, may smite all the
malice of Daevas and Men, of the Yatus and
Pairikas, of the oppressors, the blind, and the deaf.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XIV.

60. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Whose renown is good, whose shape is good,
whose glory is good; who has boons to give at his
will, who has pasture-fields to give at his will;
harmless to the tiller of the ground, ....
, beneficent;
he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, all-knowing, undeceivable
god.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

61. The text is corrupt (
vasô-yaonânâi inatãm
).

XV.

61. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Firm-legged
, a watcher fully awake; valiant, a
chief in assemblies; making the waters flow forward;
listening to appeals; making the waters run
and the plants grow up; ruling over the karshwars
;

delivering
; happy
; undeceivable;
endowed with many senses
; a creature of wisdom;

Y62.5).

63. Karshôo-râzanghem: kêshvar vîrâi (Pahl. tr. ibid).

64. From Ahriman; cf. Y29.6 (vyâna = vichârishn, vishuddhatâ.)

65. Yaokhshtivant: kâmakômand (possessing whatever he wishes
for,
Vd20.1
).

66. See Yt10.82, note.

62. 'Who gives neither strength nor vigour to him
who has lied unto Mithra; who gives neither glory
nor any boon to him who has lied unto Mithra.

63. 'Thou takest away the strength from their
arms, being angry and all-powerful; thou takest the
swiftness from their feet, the eye-sight from their
eyes, the hearing from their ears.

'Not the wound of the well-sharpened spear or of
the flying arrow reaches that man to whom Mithra
comes for help with all the strength of his soul, he,
of the ten-thousand spies, the powerful all-knowing,
undeceivable god
.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer
him a sacrifice worth being heard....

67. From Yt10.23-24.

XVI.

64. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who takes possession
of the beautiful, wide-expanding
law, greatly and powerfully, and whose face
looks over all the seven karshwars of the earth;

68. Cf.
Y43.7
: vyânayâ: amat vandînît, yat grihnâti.

65. 'Who is swift amongst the swift, liberal
amongst the liberal, strong amongst the strong, a
chief of assembly amongst the chiefs of assemblies;
increase-giving, fatness-giving, cattle-giving, sovereignty-giving,
son-giving, cheerfulness
-giving, and
bliss
-giving.

69.
Cf. Yt10.5, notes 6 and 7.

66. 'With whom proceed Ashi Vanguhi, and Parendi
on her light chariot
, the awful Manly Courage,
the awful kingly Glory, the awful sovereign Sky, the
awful cursing thought
of the wise, the awful Fravashis
of the faithful, and he who keeps united together
the many faithful worshippers of Mazda
.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

70. Cf.
Yt8.38.

71. See above,
S1.30, note 1.

72. Mithra himself (?).

XVII.

67. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who drives along on his high-wheeled chariot,
made of a heavenly
substance, from the Karshvare [keshwar]
of Arezahi
to the Karshvare of Xwaniratha, the
bright one; accompanied by
the wheel of sovereignty
,
the Glory made by Mazda, and the Victory
made by Ahura;

73. Or 'invisible.'

74. The western keshwar (see
above, § 15, note 20
); this seems to
refer to the career of Mithra during the night; cf.
§ 95.

75. And rolling upon it.

76. Cf.
Yt13.89, note.

68. 'Whose chariot is embraced
by the great
Ashi Vanguhi; to whom the Law of Mazda opens a
way, that he may go easily; whom four heavenly
steeds, white, shining, seen afar, beneficent, endowed
with knowledge, swiftly
carry along the heavenly
space
, while the cursing thought of the wise pushes
it forward;

77. And uplifted.

78. Doubtful.

79. See
Yt8.6, note 1.

69. 'From whom all the Daevas unseen and the
Varenya fiends
flee away in fear. Oh! may we

never fall across the rush of the angry lord
, who
goes and rushes from a thousand sides against his
foe, he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful,
all-knowing, undeceivable god.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

80. See Vend. Introd. IV, 23.

81. Cf.
§ 98.

XVIII.

70. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Before whom Verethraghna, made by Ahura, runs
opposing the foes in the shape of a boar
, a sharp-toothed
he-boar, a sharp-jawed boar, that kills at
one stroke, pursuing
, wrathful, with a dripping face;
strong, with iron feet, iron fore-paws
, iron weapons,
an iron tail, and iron jaws;

82. See
Yt14.15
; cf.
Yt10.127.

83. Anupôithwa; cf. pôithwa (Vd14) = rânînishn.

84. Literally, hands.

71. 'Who, eagerly clinging to the fleeing foe, along
with Manly Courage, smites the foe in battle, and
does not think he has smitten him, nor does he
consider it a blow till he has smitten away the
marrow
and the column of life
, the marrow
and
the spring of existence.

85. Doubtful.

86. The spine.

72. 'He cuts all the limbs to pieces, and mingles,
together with the earth, the bones, hair, brains, and
blood of the men who have lied unto Mithra
.

'For his brightness and glory, we offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

87. Cf.
§ 80.

XIX.

73. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who, with hands lifted up, rejoicing, cries out,
speaking thus:

74. '"O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent spirit!
Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'"If men would worship me
with a sacrifice in
which I were invoked by my own name, as they
worship the other gods with sacrifices in which they
are invoked by their own names, then I should
come to the faithful at the appointed time; I should
come in the appointed time of my beautiful, immortal
life
."

88. They have worshipped him and he has subsequently overcome
the Mithradrujes; this accounts for the word rejoicing.

89. Cf.
Yt10.55.

75. 'May we keep our field; may we never be
exiles from our field, exiles from our house, exiles
from our borough, exiles from our town, exiles from
our country.

76. 'Thou dashest in pieces the malice of the
malicious, the malice of the men of malice: dash
thou in pieces the killers of faithful men!

'Thou hast good horses, thou hast a good
chariot: thou art bringing help at every appeal, and
art powerful.

77. 'I will pray unto thee for help, with many
consecrations, with good consecrations of libations;
with many offerings, with good offerings of libations,
that we, abiding in thee, may long inhabit a good
abode, full of all the riches that can be wished for.

78. 'Thou keepest those nations that tender a
good worship to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures;
thou dashest in pieces those that delight in havoc.
Unto thee will I pray for help: may he come to us
for help, the awful, most powerful Mithra, the
worshipful and praiseworthy, the glorious lord of
nations.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XX.

79. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who made a dwelling for Rashnu
, and to whom
Rashnu gave all his soul for long friendship;

90. The Genius of Truth (
Yt12
); Mithra gives a dwelling to
the truthful man in the same way as he destroys the dwelling of the
liar (§ 80).

80. 'Thou art a keeper and protector of the dwelling
of those who lie not: thou art the maintainer of
those who lie not. With thee hath Verethraghna,
made by Ahura, contracted the best of all friendships
,
and thus it is how so many men who have
lied unto Mithra, even privily
, lie smitten down on
the ground.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

91. Cf.
§ 70.

92.
Aipi vithishi
; Vedic
api vyathis
(VIII, 45, 19).

XXI.

81. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who made a dwelling for Rashnu, and to whom
Rashnu gave all his soul for long friendship;

82. 'To whom Ahura Mazda gave a thousand

senses
and ten thousand eyes to see. With those
eyes and those senses, he watches the man who
injures Mithra, the man who lies unto Mithra.
Through those eyes and those senses, he is undeceivable,
he, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful,
all-knowing, undeceivable god.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

93.
Yaokhshti
, the root of Persian
nyôshîdan
, Pahlavi
niyôkhshîtan
,
to hear; one might be inclined to translate 'a thousand ears,'
or 'a thousand hearings;' but the meaning of the word must
have been rather more general, as Neriosangh translates it
(
pranidhi
, IX, 8 [25]).

XXII.

83. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Whom the lord of the country invokes for help, with hands uplifted;

'Whom the lord of the town invokes for help, with hands uplifted;

84. 'Whom the lord of the borough invokes for help, with hands uplifted;

'Whom the master of the house invokes for help, with hands uplifted;

'Whom the ....
in danger of death
invokes for help, with hands
uplifted;

'Whom the poor man, who follows the good law, when wronged and
deprived of his rights, invokes for help, with hands uplifted.

Yasna 53.6).

85. 'The voice of his wailing reaches up to the
sky, it goes over the earth all around, it goes over

the seven karshwars, whether he utters his prayer
in a low tone of voice
or aloud.

96.
Vâchem
, the so-called
vâj
. [Cf.
baj
.
-JHP.]

86. 'The cow driven astray invokes him for help
,
longing for the stables:

'"When will that bull, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
bring us back, and make us reach the
stables? when will he turn us back to the right
way from the den of the Druj where we were
driven
?"

97. Most manuscripts have added here, from the preceding
clauses, 'with hands uplifted!'

98. An allusion to a myth in which Mithra was described as an
Indra delivering the cows carried away by a Vritra: Firmicus
Maternus called him abactorem boum (
De Errore Profan. Relig.

V); Commodianus compares him with Cacus:

'Vrtebatque boves alienos semper in antris

Sicut et Cacus Vulcani filius ille.'

(Apud Windischmann, Mithra, p. 64.)

87. 'And to him with whom Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures, has been satisfied, he comes with
help; and of him with whom Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures, has been offended, he crushes down
the house, the borough, the town, the province, the
country.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXIII.

88. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'To whom the enlivening, healing, fair, lordly,
golden-eyed Haoma offered up a sacrifice on the
highest of the heights, on the Haraiti Bareza
, he

the undefiled to one undefiled, with undefiled
baresma, undefiled libations, and undefiled words;

99. See
above, § 50, note 56.

89. 'Whom
the holy Ahura Mazda has established
as a priest, quick in performing the sacrifice
and loud in song. He performed the sacrifice with
a loud voice, as a priest quick in sacrifice and loud
in song, a priest to Ahura Mazda, a priest to
the Amesha-Spentas. His voice reached up to the
sky, went over the earth all around, went over the
seven keshwars.

100. Haoma; cf.
Yasna 9.26.

90. 'Who first lifted up Haomas, in a mortar
inlaid with stars and made of a heavenly substance.
Ahura Mazda longed for him, the Amesha-Spentas
longed for him, for the well-slapen body of him
whom the swift-horsed sun awakes for prayer from
afar
.

101. For the morning service in the Gah Ushahin.

91. 'Hail to Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who
has a thousand ears and ten thousand eyes! Thou
art worthy of sacrifice and prayer: mayest thou have
sacrifice and prayer in the houses of men! Hail to
the man who shall offer thee a sacrifice, with the
holy wood in his hand, the baresma in his hand,
the holy meat in his hand, the holy mortar in his
hand
, with his hands well-washed, with the mortar
well-washed, with the bundles of baresma tied up,
the Haoma uplifted, and the Ahuna Vairya sung
through.

102. Cf.
Vd3.1.

92. 'The holy Ahura Mazda confessed that religion
and so did Vohu-Mano, so did Asha-Vahishta,
so did Khshathra-Vairya, so did Spenta-Armaiti, so

did Haurvatat and Ameretat; and all the Amesha-Spentas
longed for and confessed his religion. The
kind Mazda conferred upon him the mastership
of the world; and [so did they
] who saw thee
amongst all creatures the right lord and master of
the world, the best cleanser of these creatures.

103. The Amesha-Spentas.

93. 'So mayest thou in both worlds, mayest thou
keep us in both worlds, O Mithra, lord of wide pastures!
both in this material world and in the world of
the spirit, from the fiend of Death, from the fiend
Aeshma
, from the fiendish hordes, that lift up the
spear of havoc, and from the onsets of Aeshma,
wherein the evil-doing Aeshma rushes along with
Vidotu
, made by the Daevas.

104. See Vend. Introd. IV, 22.

105. See ibid.

94. 'So mayest thou, O Mithra, lord of wide pastures!
give swiftness to our teams, strength to our
own bodies, and that we may watch with full success
those who hate us, smite down our foes, and
destroy at one stroke our adversaries, our enemies
and those who hate us
.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

106. See
Yt5.53
;
Yt10.114.

XXIV.

95. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who goes over the earth, all her breadth over,
after the setting of the sun
, touches both ends of

this wide, round earth, whose ends lie afar, and
surveys everything that is between the earth and
the heavens,

107. It should seem as if Mithra was supposed to retrace his steps
during the night. The Hindus supposed that the sun had a bright
face and a dark one, and that during the night it returned from
the west to the east with its dark face turned towards the earth.

96. 'Swinging in his hands a club with a hundred
knots, a hundred edges, that rushes forwards and
fells men down; a club cast out of red brass, of
strong, golden brass; the strongest of all weapons,
the most victorious of all weapons
;

108. Cf.
§ 132.

97. 'From whom Angra Mainyu, who is all death,
flees away in fear; from whom Aeshma, the evil-doing
Peshotanu
, flees away in fear; from whom
the long-handed Bushyasta
flees away in fear;
from whom all the Daevas unseen and the Varenya
fiends flee away in fear
.

109. See Vend. Introd. V, 19.

110. See ibid. IV, 24.

111. Cf.
§ 69.

98. 'Oh! may we never fall across the rush of
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, when in anger
!
May Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, never smite
us in his anger; he who stands up upon this earth
as the strongest of all gods, the most valiant of all
gods, the most energetic of all gods, the swiftest of
all gods, the most fiend-smiting of all gods, he,
Mithra, the lord of wide pastures
.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

112. Cf.
Yt10.69.

113. §§ 97-98 = §§ 134-135.

XXV.

99. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'From whom all the Daevas unseen and the
Varenya fiends flee away in fear
.

'The lord of nations, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
drives forward at the right-hand side of
this wide, round earth, whose ends lie afar.

114. Cf.
§ 97.

100. 'At his right hand drives the good, holy
Sraosha; at his left hand drives the tall and strong
Rashnu; on all sides around him drive the waters,
the plants, and the Fravashis of the faithful.

101. 'In his might, he ever brings to them falcon-feathered
arrows, and, when diiving, he himself
comes there, where are nations, enemy to Mithra,
he, first and foremost, strikes blows with his club
on the horse and his rider; he throws fear and
fright upon the horse and his rider.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXVI.

102. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'The warrior of the white horse, of the sharp
spear, the long spear, the quick arrows; foreseeing
and clever;

103. 'Whom Ahura Mazda has established to
maintain and look over all this moving
world, and
who maintains and looks over all this moving world;
who, never sleeping, wakefully guards the creation
of Mazda; who, never sleeping, wakefully maintains
the creation of Mazda;

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

115.
Fravoish
; Parsi tradition translates large:
frâz
(tr. Phl.),

buland
(Asp., Yasna 57.15).

XXVII.

104. 'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Whose long arms, strong with Mithra-strength, encompass what
he seizes in the easternmost river and what he beats with the
westernmost river, what is by the Sanaka of the Rangha and what
is by the boundary of the earth.

105.
'And thou, O Mithra! encompassing all this around, do thou
reach it, all over, with thy arms.

'The man without glory, led astray from the right way, grieves
in his heart; the man without glory thinks thus in himself: "That
careless Mithra does not see all the evil that is done, nor all
the lies that are told."

106.
'But I think thus in my heart:

'"Should the evil thoughts of the earthly man be a hundred
times worse, they would not rise so high as the good thoughts
of the heavenly Mithra;

'"Should the evil words of the earthly man be a hundred times
worse, they would not rise so high as the good words of the heavenly
Mithra;

'"Should the evil deeds of the earthly man be a hundred times
worse, they would not rise so high as the good deeds of the heavenly
Mithra;

107.
'"Should the heavenly wisdom in the earthly man be a
hundred times greater, it would not rise so high as the heavenly
w'isdom in the heavenly Mithra;

''And thus, should the ears of the earthly man hear a hundred
time better, he would not hear so well as the heavenly Mithra,
whose ear hears well who has a thousand senses, and sees every
man that tells a lie."

'Mithra stands up in his strength, he drives in the awfulness
of royalty, and sends from his eyes beautiful looks that shine
from afar, (saying):

108.
''Who will offer me a sacrifice? Who will lie unto me? Who
thinks me a god worthy of a good sacrifice? Who thinks me worthy
only of a bad sacrifice? To whom shall I, in my might, impart
brightness and glory? To whom bodily health? To whom shall I,
in my might, impart riches and full weal? Whom shall I bless by
raising him a virtuous offspring?

109.
"'To whom shall I give in return, without his thinking
of it, the awful sovereignty, beautifully. arrayed, with many
armies, and most perfect; the sovereignty of an all-powerful tyrant,
who fells down heads, valiant, smiting, and unsmitten; who orders
chastisement to be done and his order is done at once, which he
has ordered in his anger?"

'O Mithra! when thou art offended and not satisfied, he soothes
thy mind, and makes Mithra satisfied.

110.
'"To whom shall I, in my might, impart sickness and death?
To whom shall I impart poverty and sterility? Of whom shall I
at one stroke cut off the offspring!

111.
'"From whom shall I take away, without his thinking of
it, the awful sovereignty, beautifully arrayed, with many armies,
and most perfect; the sovereignty of an all-powerful tyrant, who
fells down heads, valiant, smiting, and unsmitten; who orders
chastisement to be done and his order is done at once, which he
has ordered in his anger."

'O Mithra! while thou art satisfied and not angry, he moves thy
heart to anger, and makes Mithra unsatisfied.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXVIII.

112.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'A warrior with a silver helm, a golden cuirass, who kills with
the poniard, strong, valiant, lord of the borough. Bright are
the ways of Mithra, by which he goes towards the country, when,
wishing well, he turns its plains and vales to pasture grounds,

113. 'And then cattle and males come to graze, as many as he wants.

'May Mithra and Ahura, the high gods, come to us for help, when
the poniard lifts up its voice aloud, when the nostrils of the
horses quiver, when the poniards ...., when the, strings of the
bows whistle and shoot sharp arrows; then the brood of those whose
libations are hated fall smitten to the ground, with their hair
torn off.

114. 'So mayest thou, O Mithra, lord of wide pastures! give swiftness
to our teams, strength to our own bodies, and that we may watch
with full success those who hate us, smite down our foes, and
destroy at one stroke our adversaries, our enemies, and those
who hate us.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXIX.

115.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake.

'O Mithra, lord of wide pastures! thou master of the house, of
the borough, of the town, of the country, thou Zarathushtrotema!

116.
'Mithra is twentyfold between two friends or two relations;

'Mithra is thirtyfold between two men of the same group;

'Mithra is fortyfold between two partners;

'Mithra is fiftyfold between wife and husband;

'Mithra is sixtyfold between two pupils (of the same master);

'Mithra is seventyfold between the pupil and his master;

'Mithra is eightyfold between the son-in-law and his father-in-law;

'Mithra is ninetyfold between two brothers;

117.
'Mithra is a hundredfold between the father and the son;

'Mithra is a thousandfold between two nations;

'Mithra is ten thousandfold when connected with the Law of Mazda,
and then he will be every day of victorious strength.

118.
'May I come unto thee with a prayer that goes lowly or goes
highly! As this sun rises up above the Hara Berezaiti and then
fulfils its career, so may I, O Spitama! with a prayer that goes
lowly or goes highly, rise up above the will of the fiend Angra
Mainyu!

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXX.

119.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastwes, ....
sleepless, and ever awake,

'Offer up a sacrifice unto Mithra, O Spitama! and order thy pupils
to do the same.

'Let the worshipper of Mazda sacrifice unto thee with small cattle,
with black cattle, with flying birds, gliding forward on wings.

120.
'To Mithra all the faithful worshiypers of Mazda must give
strength and energy with offered and proffered Haomas, which the
Zaotar proffers unto him and gives in sacrifice. Let the faithful
man drink of the libations cleanly prepared, which if he does,
if he offers them unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, Mithra
will be pleased with him and without anger.'

121.
Zarathushtra asked him: 'O Ahura Mazda! how shall the faithful
man drink the libations cleanly prepared, which if he does and
he offers them unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, Mithra
will be pleased vvith him and without anger?'

122.
Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let them wash their bodies three days
and three nights; let them undergo thirty strokes for the sacrifice
and prayer unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures. Let them wash
their bodies two days and two nights; let them undergo twenty
strokes for the sacrifice and prayer unto Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures. Let no man drink of these libations who does not
know the staota yesnya: Vispe ratavo.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacriace worth
being heard....

XXXI.

123.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'To whom Ahura Mazda offered up a sacrifice in the shining Garo-nmana.

124.
'With his arms lifted up towards Immortality, Mithra, the
lord of wide pastures, drives forward from the shining Garo-nmana,
in a beautiful chariot that drives on, ever-swift, adorned with
all sorts of ornaments, and made of gold.

125.
'Four stallions draw that chariot, all of the same white colour,
living on heavenly food and undying. The hoofs of their fore-feet
are shod with gold, the hoofs of their hind-feet are shod with
silver; all are yoked to the same pole, and wear the yoke and
the cross-beams of the yoke, fastened with hooks of Khshathra
vairya to a beautiful....

126.
'At his right hand drives Rashnu-Razishta, the most beneficent
and most well-shapen.

'At his left hand drives the most upright Chista, the holy one,
bearing libations in her hands, clothed with white clothes, and
white herself; and the cursing thought of the Law of Mazda.

127. 'Close by him drives the strong cursing thought of the wise
man, opposing foes in the shape of a boar, a sharp-toothed he-boar,
a sharp- jawed boar, that kills at one stroke, pursuing, wrathful,
with a dripping face, strong and swift to run, and rushing all
around.

'Behind him drives Atar, all in a blaze, and the awful kingly
Glory.

128.
'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stand a thousand bows well-made, with a string of cowgut; they
go through the heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly
space upon the skulls of the Daevas.

129.
'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stand a thousand vulture-feathered arrows, with a golden mouth,
with a horn shaft, with a brass tail, and well-made. They go through
the heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly space upon
the skulls of the Daevas.

130.
'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stand a thousand spears well-made and sharp-piercing. They go
through the heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly space
upon the skulls of the Daevas.

'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stand a thousand steel-hammers, two-edged, well-made. They go
through the heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly space
upon the skulls of the Daevas.

131.
'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stand a thousand swords, two-edged and well-made. They go through
the heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly space upon
the skulls of the Daevas.

'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stand a thousand maces of iron, well-made. They go through the
heavenly space, they fall through the heavenly space upon the
skulls of the Daevas.

132. 'On a side of the chariot of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
stands a beautiful well-falling club, with a hundred knots, a
hundred edges, that rushes forward and fells men down; a club
cast out of red brass, of strong, golden brass; the strongest
of all weapons, the most victorious of all weapons. It goes through
the heavenly space, it falls through the heavenly space upon the
skulls of the Daevas.

133.
After he has smitten the Daevas, after he has smitten down
the men who lied unto Mithra, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
drives forward through Arezahe and Savahe, through Fradadhafshu
and Vidadhafshu, through Vourubareshti and Vouru-jareshti, through
this our Karshvare, the bright Hvaniratha.

134.
'Angra Mainyu, who is all death, flees away in fear; Aeshma,
the evil-doing Peshotanu, flees away in fear; the long-handed
Bushyasta flees away in fear; all the Daevas unseen and the Varenya
fiends flee away in fear.

135.
'Oh! may we never fall across the rush of Mithra, the lord
of wide pastures, when in anger! May Mithra, the lord of wide
pastures, never smite us in his anger; he who stands up upon this
earth as the strongest of all gods, the most valiant of all gods,
the most energetic of all gods, the swiftest of all gods, the
most fiend-smiting of all gods, he, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXXII.

136.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'For whom white stallions, yoked to his chariot, draw it, on one
golden wheel, with a full shining axle.

137.
'If Mithra takes his libations to his own dwelling, "Happy
that man, I think," -- said Ahura Mazda, "O holy Zarathra!
for whom a holy priest, as pious as any in the world, who is the
Word incarnate, offers up a sacrifice unto Mithra with bundles
of baresma and with the [proper] words.

'"Straight to that man, I think, will Mithra come, to visit
his dwelling,

138.
'"When Mithra's boons will come to him, as he follows
God's teaching, and thinks according to God's teaching.

'"Woe to that man, I think," - said Ahura Mazda, - "O
holy Zarathushtra! for whom an unholy priest, not pious, who is
not the Word incarnate, stands behind the baresma, however full
may be the bundles of baresma he ties, however long may be the
sacrifice he performs."

139.
'He does not delight Ahura Mazda, nor the other Amesha-Spentas,
nor Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, he who thus scorns Mazda,
and the other Amesha-Spentas, and Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
and the Law, and Rashnu, and Arstat, who makes the world grow,
who makes the world increase.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXXIII.

140.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake.

'I will offer up a sacrifice unto the good Mithra, O Spitama!
unto the strong, heavenly god, who is foremost, highly merciful,
and peerless; whose house is above, a stout and strong warrior;

141.
'Victorious and armed with a well-fashioned weapon, watchful
in darkness and undeceivable. He is the stoutest of the stoutest,
he is the strongest of the strongest, he is the most intelligent
of the gods, he is victorious and endowed with Glory: he, of the
ten thousand eyes, of the ten thousand spies, the powerful, all-knowing,
undeceivable god.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXXIV.

142.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, ....
sleepless, and ever awake;

'Who, with his manifold knowledge, powerfully increases the creation
of Spenta Mainyu, and is a well-created and most great Yazata,
self-shining like the moon, when he makes his own body shine;

143.
'Whose face is flashing with light like the face of the star
Tistrya; whose chariot is embraced by that goddess who is foremost
amongst those who have no deceit in them, O Spitama! who is fairer
than any creature in the world, and full of light to shine. I
will worship that chariot, wrought by the Maker, Ahura Mazda,
inlaid with stars and made of a heavenly substance; (the chariot)
of Mithra, who has ten thousand spies, the powerful, all-knowing,
undeceivable god.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer him a sacrifice worth
being heard....

XXXV.

144.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who
is truth-speaking, a chief in assemblies, with a thousand ears,
well-shapen, with a thousand eyes, high, with full knowledge,
strong, sleepless, and ever awake.

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra around countries;

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra within countries;

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra in this country;

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra above countries;

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra under countries;

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra before countries;

'We sacrifice unto the Mithra behind countries.

145.
'We sacrifice unto Mithra and Ahura, the two great, imperishable,
holy gods; and unto the stars, and the moon, and the sun, with
the trees that yield up baresma. We sacrifice unto Mithra, the
lord of all countries.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures.

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and p yer, and the strength and vigour
of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who has a thousand ears,
ten thousand eyes, a Yazata invoked by his own name; and that
of Rama Hvastra.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones!'

Yt10

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 11
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt11sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt11

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

11. SROSH YASHT HADHOKHT.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto the holy, strong Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word, a mighty-speared
and lordly god,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I.

1.
We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha,
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness.

Good prayer, excellent prayer to the worlds, O Zarathushtra!

2.
This it is that takes away the friendship of the fiend and
fiends, of the he-fiend and of the she-fiend; it turns away in
giddiness their eyes, minds, ears, hands, feet, mouths, and tongues;
as good prayer, without deceit and without harm, is Manly Courage,
and turns away the Druj.

3.
The holy Sraosha, the best protector ofthe poor, is fiend-smiting;
he is the best smiter of the Druj.

The faithful one who pronounces most words of blessing is the
most victorious in victory; the Mathra Spenta takes best the unseen
Druj way. The Ahuna Vairya is the best fiend-smiter among all
spells; the word of truth is the fighter that is the best of all
fiend-smiters.

The Law of the worshippers of Mazda is the truest giver of all
the good things of all those that are the offspring of the good
principle; and so is the Law of Zarathushtra.

4.
And he who should pronounce that word, O Zarathushtra! either
a man or a woman with a mind all intent on holiness, with words
all intent on holiness, with deeds all intent on holiness, when
he is in fear either of high waters or of the darkness of a rainy
night;

Or at the fords of a river, or at the branching-off of roads;

Or in the meeting together of the faithful, or the rushing together
of the worshippers of the Daevas;

5.
Whether on the road or in the law he has to fear, not in that
day nor in that night shall the tormenting fiend, who wants to
torment him, prevail to throw upon him the look of his evil eye,
and the malice of the thief who carries off cattle shall not reach
him.

6.
Pronounce then that word, O Zarathushtra! that word to be
spoken, when thou fall upon the idolaters and thieves and Daevas
rushing together. Then the malice of the wicked worshippers of
the Daevas, of the Yatus and their followers, of the Pairikas
and their followers, will be affrighted and rush away. Down are
the Daevas! Down are the Daeva-worshippers, and they take back
their mouths from biting.

7.
And therefore we take around us the holy-natured Sraosha,
the holy, the fiend-smiter, as one does with shepherds' dogs;
therefore we sacrifice unto the holy-natured Sraosha, the holy,
the fiend-smiter, with good thoughts, good words, and good deeds.

8.
For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious
power, for his offering sacrifices unto the gods, I will offer
him a sacrifice worth being heard. I will offer up libations unto
the holy Sraosha, unto the great Ashi Vanguhi, and unto Nairyo-sangha,
the tall-formed.

So may the holy Sraosha, the fiend-smiter, come to us for help!

9.
We worship the holy Sraosha; we worship the great master,
Ahura Mazda, who is supreme in holiness, who is the foremost to
do deeds of holiness.

We worship all the words of Zarathushtra, and all the good deeds,
those done and those to be done.

Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

II.

10.
We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed fiend-smiting Sraosha,
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness;

Who strikes the evil-doing man, who strikes the evil-doing woman;
who smites the fiendish Druj, and is most strong and world-destroying;
who maintains and looks over all this moving world;

11.
Who, never sleeping, wakefully guards the creation of Mazda;
who, never sleeping, wakefully maintains the creation of Mazda;
who protects all the material world with his club uplifted, from
the hour when the sun is down;

12.
Who never more did enjoy sleep from the time when the two
Spirits made the world, namely, the good Spirit and the evil One;
who every day, every night, fights with the Mazainya Daevas.

13.
He bows not for fear and fright before the Daevas: before
him all the Daevas bow for fear and fright reluctantly, and rush
away to darkness.

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious
power....

III.

14.
Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha,
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness;

Who with peace and friendship watches the Druj and the most beneficent
Spirit: so that the Amesha-Spentas may go along the seven Karshvares
of the earth; who is the teacher of the Law: he himself was taught
it by Ahura Mazda, the holy One.

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious
power....

IV.

15.
Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha,
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness;

Whom the holy Ahura Mazda has created to withstand Aeshma, the
fiend of the wounding spear; we sacrifice unto Peace, whose breath
is friendly, and unto the two withstanders of sin and guilt,

16.
The friends of the holy Sraosha;

The friends of Rashnu Razista;

The friends of the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda;

The friends of Arstat, who makes the world grow, who makes the
world increase, who makes the world prosper;

The friends of Ashi Vanguhi;

The friends of the good Chisti;

The friends of the most right Chista;

17. The friends of all gods;

The friends of the Mathra Spenta;

The friends of the fiend-destroying Law;

The friends of the long-traditional teaching;

The friends of the Amesha-Spentas;

The friends of ourselves, the Saoshyants
, the two-footed part
of the holy creation;

The friends of all the beings of the holy world.

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious
power....

1. The faithful, as helping through their good deeds in the work
of final restoration, to be performed by Saoshyant (cf.
Yt13.17
).

V.

18.
Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of tbe Lord is the law of holiness....

We sacrifice unto the holy, tall-formed, fiend-smiting Sraosha,
who makes the world increase, the holy and master of holiness;

The first [Sraosha], the next, the middle, and the highest; with
the first sacrifice, with the next, with the middle, and with
the highest. We sacrifice unto all [the moments] of the holy and
strong Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word;

19.
The strong Sraosha, of the manly courage, the warrior of the
strong arms, who breaks the skulls of the Daevas; who smites with
heavy blows and is strong to smite; the holy Sraosha, who smites
with heavy blows; we sacrifice unto the crushing Ascendant of
both the holy Sraosha and Arshti.

20.
We sacrifice for all the houses protected by Sraosha, where
the holy Sraosha is dear and friendly treated and satisfied, as
well as the faithful man, rich in good thoughts, rich in good
words, rich in good deeds.

21.
We sacrifice unto the body of the holy Sraosha;

We sacrifice unto the body of Rashnu Razishta;

We sacrifice unto the body of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures;

We sacrifice unto the body of the holy wind;

We sacrifice unto the body of the good Law of the worshippers
of Mazda;

We sacrifice unto the body of Arshtat, who makes the world grow,
who makes the world increase, who makes the world prosper;

We sacrifice unto the body of Ashi Vanguhi;

We sacrifice unto the body of the good Chisti;

We sacrifice unto the body of the most right Chista;

We sacrifice unto the bodies of all the gods;

22.
We sacrifice unto the body of the Mathra Spenta;

We sacrifice unto the body of the fiend-destroying Law;

We sacrifice unto the body of the long-traditional teaching;

We sacrifice unto the bodies of the Amesha-Spentas;

We sacrifice unto the bodies of ourselves, the Saoshyants, the
two-footed part of the holy creation;

We sacrifice unto the bodies of all the beings of the holy world.

For his brightness and glory, for his strength and victorious
power....

23.
Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, the strength and vigour of the
holy, strong Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word, a mighty-speared
and lordly god

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, ... give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones!

Yt11

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 12
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt12sbe.htm
================================================================================

yt12sbe

Translit.

Glossary

12. RASHN YASHT.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness.

Unto Rashnu Razishta; unto Arshtat, who makes the world grow,
who makes the world increase; unto the true-spoken speech, that
makes the world grow;

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I

1.

The holy (Zarathushtra) asked him: 'O holy Ahura Mazda! I
ask thee; answer me with words of truth, thou who knowest the
truth. Thou art undeceivable, thou hast an undeceivable understanding;
thou art undeceivable, as thou knowest everything.

'What of the Holy Word is created true? what is created progress-making?
what is fit to discern? what is healthful? what is wise? what
is happy and more powerful to destroy than all other creatures?'

2.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'I will declare that unto thee, O pure,
holy Spitama!

'The most glorious Holy Word (itself), this is what in the Holy
Word is created true, what is created progress making, what is
fit to discern, what is healthful, wise, and happy, what is more
powerful to destroy than all other creatures.'

3.

Ahura Mazda said: 'Bind up a three-twigged baresma against
the way of the sun. [Address] unto me, Ahura Mazda, these words:
"We invoke, we bless [Ahura]; I invoke the friendship [of
Ahura] towards this var (ordeal) prepared, towards the fire and
the baresma, towards the full boiling [milk], towards the var
of oil and the sap of the plants."

4.

'Then I, Ahura Mazda, shall come for help unto thee, towards
this var prepared, towards the fire and the baresma, towards the
full boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of the
plants;

'Along with the fiend-smiting Wind, along with the cursing thought
of the wise, along with the kingly Glory, along with Saoka, made
by Mazda.

5.

'We invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong; I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared, towards the fire and the baresma, towards
the full boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of:
the plants.

6.

'Then Rashnu the tall, the strong, will come for help unto
thee, towards this var prepared, towards the fire and the baresma,
towards the full boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the
sap of the plants:

'Along with the fiend-smiting Wind, along with the cursing thought
of the wise, along with the kingly Glory, along with Saoka, made
by Mazda.

7.

'O thou, holy Rashnu! O most true Rashnu! most beneficent
Rashnu! most knowing Rashnu! most discerning Rashnu I most fore-knowing
Rashnu! most far-seeing Rashnu I Rashnu, the best doer of justice!
Rashnu, the best smiter of thieves;

8.

'The uninjured, the best killer, smiter, destroyer of thieves
and bandits! in whatever part of the world thou art watching the
doings of men and making the account... (obscure).

II

9.

'Whether thou, O hoIy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Arezahi,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

III

10.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Savahi,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards this
var prepared ... in whatever part of the world thou art.

IV

11.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Fradadhafshu,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

V

12.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Vidadhafshu,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

VI

13.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Vouru-bareshti,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

VII

14. ' Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Vouru-jareshti,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

VIII

15.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in this Karshvare, the bright
Hvaniratha, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his
friendship towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of
the world thou art.

IX

16.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the sea Vouru-Kasha,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

X

17.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the tree of the eagle,
that stands in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha, that is called
the tree of good remedies, the tree of powerful remedies, the
tree of all remedies, and on which rest the seeds of all plants;
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XI

18.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the Aodhas of the Rangha,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XII

19.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the Sanaka of the Rangha,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XIII

20.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art at one of the angles of
this earth, we invoke we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XIV

21.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art at the boundary of this
earth, we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards
this var prepared....

XV

22.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in any place of this earth,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards this
var prepared....

XVI

23.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the Hara Berezaiti, the
bright mountain around which the many (stars) revolve, where come
neither night nor darkness, no cold wind and no hot wind, no deathful
sickness, no uncleanness made by the Daevas, and the clouds cannot
reach up unto the Haraiti Bareza; we invoke, we bless Rashnu.
I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XVII

24.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art upon the highest Hukairya,
of the deep precipices, made of gold, where from this river of
mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita, leaps from a thousand times the height
of a man, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his
friendship towards this var prepared....

XVIII

25.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art upon the Taera of the height
Haraiti, around which the stars, the moon, and the sun revolve,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XIX

26.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the star Vanant, made
by Mazda, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his
friendship towards this var prepared....

XX

27.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the bright and glorious
star Tishtrya, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke
his friendship towards the var prepared....

XXI

28.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the group of the Haptoiringa
stars, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XXII

29.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in those stars that have
the seed of the waters in them, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XXIII

30.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in those stars that have
the seed of the earth in them, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XXIV

31.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in those stars that have
the seed of the plants in them, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XXV

32.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the stars that belong
to the Good Spirit, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I
invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XXVI

33.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the moon which has the
seed of the Bull in it, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong.
I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XXVII

34.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the swift-horsed sun,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XXVIII

35.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the sovereign endless
Light, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XXIX

36.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the bright, all-happy,
blissful abode of the holy Ones, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

XXX

37.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the shining Garo-demana,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

XXXI

38.

'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art, ... (obscure) we invoke,
we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards this
var prepared....

39.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

40.

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of Rashnu Razishta; of Arshtat, who makes the world grow, who
makes the world increase; and of the true-spoken speech that makes
the world grow.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.'

yt12sbe

Translit.

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 13
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt13sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt13

Glossary

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

13. FRAWARDIN YASHT ("Hymn to the Guardian Angels")

This digital edition copyright © 1995
by Joseph H. Peterson. All rights reserved.

,
American Edition, 1898.)

The Fravashi [
Phl.
Farohar] is the inner power in every being that maintains
it and makes it grow and subsist. Originally the Fravashis were
the same as the Pitris of the Hindus or the Manes of the Latins,
that is to say, the everlasting and deified souls of the dead (see

§§ 49-52
); but in course of time they gained a wider domain, and
not only men, but gods and even physical objects, like the sky and
the earth, etc. (
§§ 85-86
), had each a Fravashi (see
Ormazd et
Ahriman
, §§ 111-113).

This Yasht is to be divided into two parts. The former part
(
§§ 1-84
) is a glorification of the powers and attributes of the
Fravashis in general; the latter part (
§§ 85-158
) is an enumeration
of the Fravashis of the most celebrated heroes of Mazdeism, from
the first man, Gaya Maretan [Gayomard], down to the last, Saoshyant.

The latter part is like a Homer's catalogue of Mazdeism.
The greater part of the historical legends of Iran lies here condensed
into a register of proper names. This enumeration is
divided into seven chapters:

The first (
XXIV, §§ 85-95
) contains the names of several gods,
of the first man, Gara Maretan, the first law-giver, Zarathushtra, and
his first disciple, Maidyo-maungha;

The second part (
XXV, §§ 96-110
) contains the names of the
disciples of Zarathushtra, most of them belonging to the epical
cyclus of Vishtaspa (Gushtasp);

The third part (
XXVI, §§ 111-117
) is of uncertain character,
and no name contained in it is found in the epical legends;

Thr fourth part (
XXVII, §§ 118-128
) seems to be devoted to
the heroes of the other keshwars and to mythical beings, born
or unborn (
§§ 121, 122, 127, 128
);

The fifth part
XXVIII, § 129
is devoted to Saoshyant alone;

The sixth part (
XIX, §§ 130-138
) is devoted to the heroes
before the time of Zarathushtra;

The seventh part (
XXX, §§ 139-142
) is devoted to the holy
women of Mazdeism from Hvovi, Zarathushtra's wife, down to
Srutat-fedhri, Vanghu-fedhri, and Eredat-fedhri, the future mothers
of his three unborn sons.

The second, third, and fourth enumerations all end with the

name of Astvat-ereta (that is to say, Saoshyant), which shows that
they do not refer to successive generations, but to three independent
branches, which are each developed apart down to the
time of the Saviour.

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hawan],
the holy and master of holiness.

Unto the awful, overpowering Fravashis of the
faithful; unto the Fravashis of the men of the primitive
law
; unto the Fravashis of the next-of-kin,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

NOTES:

1. The so-called paoiryo-tkaesha: the primitive law is what 'is
considered as the true Mazdayasnian religion in all ages, both
before and after the time of Zarthosht' (West,
Pahlavi Texts
I,
242, note 1); cf. § 150.

I.

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra,
saying: 'Do thou proclaim, O pure Zarathushtra! the
vigour and strength, the glory, the help and the joy
that are in the Fravashis of the faithful, the awful
and overpowering Fravashis; do thou tell how they
come to help me, how they bring assistance unto
me, the awful Fravashis of the faithful
.

2. Cf.
§ 19.

2. 'Through their brightness and glory, O Zarathushtra!
I maintain that sky, there above, shining
and seen afar, and encompassing this earth all
around.

3. 'It looks like a palace, that stands built of a

heavenly substance
, firmly established, with ends
that lie afar, shining in its body of ruby over the
three-thirds (of the earth)
; it is like a garment
inlaid with stars, made of a heavenly substance, that
Mazda puts on, along with Mithra and Rashnu and
Spenta-Armaiti, and on no side can the eye perceive
the end of it.

3. Reading
mainyu-tâshtô
; cf.
Yt10.90, 143
, and in
this very paragraph
vanghanem mainyu-tâshtem
.

4. A division of the earth different from and older than the
division into seven keshwars; cf.
Yasna 11.7
; this division
was derived by analogy from the tripartite division of the universe
(earth, atmosphere, and heaven).

4. 'Through their brightness and glory, O Zarathushtra!
I maintain Ardvi Sura Anahita, the wide-expanding
and health-giving, who hates the Daevas
and obeys the laws of Ahura, who is worthy of
sacrifice in the material world, worthy of prayer in
the material world; the life-increasing and holy, the
flocks-increasing and holy, the fold-increasing and
holy, the wealth increasing and holy, the country
increasing and holy
;

5.
Yt5.1.

5. 'Who makes the seed of all males pure, who
makes the womb of all females pure for bringing
forth, who makes all females bring forth in safety,
who puts milk in the breasts of all females in the
right measure and the right quality;

6. §§ 5-8 = Yt5.2-3.

6. 'The large river, known afar, that is as large
as the whole of all the waters that run along the
earth; that runs powerfully from the height Hukairya
down to the sea Vouru-kasha.

7. 'All the shores of the sea Vouru-kasha are
boiling over, all the middle of it is boiling over,

when she runs down there, when she streams down
there, she, Ardvi Sura Anahita, who has a thousand
cells and a thousand channels; the extent of each of
those cells, of each of those channels, is as much
as a man can ride in forty days, riding on a good horse.

8. 'From this river of mine alone flow all the
waters that spread all over the seven keshwars;
this river of mine alone goes on bringing waters,
both in summer and in winter. This river of mine
purifies the seed in males, the womb in females, the
milk in females' breasts
.

7. §§ 4-8 = Yt5.1-5.

9. 'Through their brightness and glory, O Zarathushtra! I maintain
the wide earth made by Ahura, the large and broad earth, that
bears so much that is fine, that bears all the bodily world, the
live and the dead, and the high mountains, rich in pastures and
waters;

10.
'Upon which run the many streams and rivers; upon which the
many kinds of plants grow up from the ground, to nourish animals
and men, to nourish the Aryan nations, to nourish the five kinds
of animals, and to help the faithful.

11.
'Through their brightness and glory, O Zarathushtra! I maintain
in the womb the child that has been conceived, so that it does
not die from the assaults of Vidotu, and I develop in it the bones,
the hair, the ..., the entrails, the feet, and the sexual organs.

12.
'Had not the awful Fravashis of the faithful given help unto
me, those animals and men of mine, of which there are such excellent
kinds, would not subsist; strength would belong to the Druj, the
dominion would belong to the Druj, the material world would belong
to the Druj.

13.
'Between the earth and the sky the immaterial creatures would
be harassed by the Druj; between the earth and the sky the immaterial
creatures would be smitten by the Druj; and never afterwards would
Angra-Mainyu give way to the blows of Spenta-Mainyu.

14.
'Through their brightness and glory the waters run and flow
forward from the never-failing springs; through their brightness
and glory the plants grow up from the earth, by the never-failing
springs; through their brightness and glory the winds blow, driving
down the clouds towards the never-failing springs.

15.
'Through their brightness and glory the females conceive offspring;
through their brightness and glory they bring forth in safety;
it is through their brightness and glory when they become blessed
with children.

16.
'Through their brightness and glory a man is born who is a
chief in assemblies and meetings, who listens well to the (holy)
words, whom Wisdom holds dear, and who returns a victor from discussions
with Gaotema, the heretic.

'Through their brightness and glory the sun goes his way; through
their brightness and glory the moon goes her way; through their
brightness and glory the stars go their way.

17. 'In fearful battles they are the wisest for help, the Fravashis
of the faithful.

'The most powerful amongst the Fravashis of the faithful, O Spitama!
are those of the men of the primitive law or those of the Saoshyants
not yet born, who are to restore the world. Of the others, the
Fravashis of the living faithful are more powerful, O Zarathushtra!
than those of the dead, O Spitama!

18.
'And the man who in life shall treat the Fravashis of the
faithful well, will become a ruler of the country with full power,
and a chief most strong; so shall any man of you become, who shall
treat Mithra well, the lord of wide pastures, and Arshtat, who
makes the world grow, who makes the world increase.

19. 'Thus do I proclaim unto thee, O pure Spitama! the vigour
and strength, the glory, the help, and the joy that are in the
Fravashis of the faithful, the awful and overpowering Fravashis;
and how they come to help me, how they bring assistance unto me,
the awful Fravashis of the faithful.'

II.

20.
Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'If in
this material world, O Spitama Zarathushtra! thou happenest to
come upon frightful roads, full of dangers and fears, O Zarathushtra!
and thou fearest for thyself, then do thou recite these words,
then proclaim these fiend-smiting words, O Zarathushtra!

21.
'"I praise, I invoke, I meditate upon, and we sacrifice
unto the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful. We
worship the Fravashis of the masters of the houses, those of the
lords of the boroughs, those of the lords of the towns, those
of the lords of the countries, those of the Zarathustrotemas;
the Fravashis of those that are, the Fravashis of those that have
been, the Fravashis of those that will be; all the Fravashis of
all nations, and most friendly the Fravashis of the friendly nations;

22.
'"Who maintain the sky, who maintain the waters, who
maintain the earth, who maintain the cattle, who maintain in the
womb the child that has been conceived, so that it does not die
from the assaults of Vidotu, and develop in it the bones, the
hair, the ...., the entrails, the feet, and the sexual organs;

23.
'"Who are much-bringing, who move with awfulness, well-moving,
swiftly moving, quickly moving, who move when invoked; who are
to be invoked in the conquest of good, who are to be invoked in
fights against foes, who are to be invoked in battles;

24.
'"Who give victory to their invoker, who give boons to
their lover, who give health to the sick man, who give good Glory
to the faithful man that brings libations and invokes them with
a sacrifice and words of propitiation,

25.
'"Who turn to that side where are faithful men, most
devoted to holiness, and where is the greatest piety, where the
faithful man is rejoiced, and where the faithful man is not ill-treated."'

III.

26.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who are the mightiest of drivers, the lightest of those driving
forwards, the slowest of the retiring, the safest of all bridges,
the least-erring of all weapons and arms, and who never turn their
backs.

27.
At once, wherever they come, we worship them, the good ones,
the excellent ones, the good, the strong, the beneficent Fravashis
of the faithful. They are to be invoked when the bundles of baresma
are tied; they are to be invoked in fights against foes, in battles,
and there where gallant men strive to conquer foes.

28.
Mazda invoked them for help, when he fixed the sky and the
waters and the earth and the plants; when Spenta-Mainyu fixed
the sky, when he fixed the waters, when the earth, when the cattle,
when the plants, when the child conceived in the womb, so that
it should not die from the assaults of Vidotu, and developed in
it the bones, the hair, the ...., the entrails, the feet, and
the sexual organs.

29.
Spenta-Mainyu maintained the sky, and they sustained it from
below, they, the strong Fravashis, who sit in silence, gazing
with sharp looks; whose eyes and ears are powerful, who bring
long joy, high and high-girded; well-moving and moving afar, loud-snorting,
possessing riches and a high renown.

IV.

30.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful;
whose friendship is good, and who know how to benefit; whose friendship
lasts long; who like to stay in the abode where they are not harmed
by its dwellers; who are good, beautiful afar, health-giving,
of high renown, conquering in battle, and who never do harm first.

V.

31.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful;
whose will is dreadful unto those who vex them; powerfully working
and most beneficent; who in battle break the dread arms of their
foes and haters.

VI.

32. We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful;
liberal, valiant, and full of strength, not to be seized by thought,
welfare-giving, kind, and health-giving, following with Ashi's
remedies, as far as the earth extends, as the rivers stretch,
as the sun rises.

VII.

33.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who gallantly and bravely fight, causing havoc, wounding, breaking
to pieces all the malice of the malicious, Daevas and men, and
smiting powerfully in battle, at their wish and will.

34.
You kindly deliver the Victory made by Ahura, and the crushing
Ascendant, most beneficently, to those countries where you, the
good ones, unharmed and rejoiced, unoppressed and unoffended,
have been held worthy of sacrifice and prayer, and proceed the
way of your wish.

VIII.

35.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
of high renown, smiting in battle, most strong, shield-bearing
and harmless to those who are true, whom both the pursuing and
the fleeing invoke for help: the pursuer invokes them for a swift
race, and for a swift race does the fleer invoke them;

36.
Who turn to that side where are faithful men, most devoted
to holiness, and where is the greatest piety, where the faithful
man is rejoiced, and where the faithful man is not ill-treated.

IX.

37.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who form many battalions, girded with weapons, lifting up spears,
and full of sheen; who in fearful battles come rushing along where
the gallant heroes go and assail the Danus.

38.
There you destroy the victorious strength of the Turanian
Danus; there you destroy the malice of the Turanian Danus; through
you the chiefs are of high intellect and most successful; they,
the gallant heroes, the gallant Saoshyants, the gallant conquerors
of the offspring of the Danus chiefs of myriads, who wound with
stones.

X.

39.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who rout the two wings of an army standing in battle array, who
make the centre swerve, and swiftly pursue onwards, to help the
faithful and to distress the doers of evil deeds.

XI.

40.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful;
awful, overpowering, and victorious, smiting in battle, sorely
wounding, blowing away (the foes), moving along to and fro, of
good renown, fair of body, godly of soul, and holy; who give victory
to their invoker, who give boons to their lover, who give health
to the sick man;

41.
Who give good glory to him who worships them with a sacrifice,
as that man did worship them, the holy Zarathushtra, the chief
of the material world, the head of the two-footed race, in whatever
struggle he had to enter, in whatever distress he did fear;

42.
Who, when well invoked, enjoy bliss in the heavens; who, when
well invoked, come forward from the heavens, who are the heads
of that sky above, possessing the well-shapen Strength, the Victory
made by Ahura, the crushing Ascendant, and Welfare, the wealth-bringing,
boon-bringing, holy, well fed, worthy of sacrifice and prayer
in the perfection of holiness.

43.
They shed Satavaesa between the earth and the sky, him to
whom the waters belong, who listens to appeals and makes the waters
flow and the plants grow up, to nourish animals and men, to nourish
the Aryan nations, to nourish the five kinds of animals and to
help the faithful.

44.
Satavaesa comes down and flows between the earth and the sky,
he to whom the waters belong, who listens to appeals and makes
the waters and the plants grow up, fair, radiant, and full of
light, to nourish animals and men, to nourish the Aryan nations,
to nourish the five kinds of animals, and to help the faithful.

XII.

45.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful;
with helms of brass, with weapons of brass, with armour of brass;
who struggle in the fights for victory in garments of light, arraying
the battles and bringing them forwards, to kill thousands of Daevas.

When the wind blows from behind them and brings their breath unto
men,

46.
Then men know where blows the breath of victory: and they
pay pious homage unto the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of
the faithful, with their hearts prepared and their arms uplifted.

47.
Whichever side they have been first worshipped in the fulness
of faith of a devoted heart, to that side turn the awful Fravashis
of the faithful, along with Mithra and Rashnu and the awful cursing
thought of the wise and the victorious wind.

48.
And those nations are smitten at one stroke by their fifties
and their hundreds, by their hundreds and their thousands, by
their thousands and their tens of thousands, by their tens of
thousands and their myriads of myriads, against which turn the
awful Fravashis of the faithful, along with Mithra and Rashnu,
and the awful cursing thought of the wise and the victorious wind.

XIII.

49.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who come and go through the borough at the time of the Hamaspathmaidyem;
they go along there for ten nights, asking thus:

50.
'Who will praise us? Who will offer us a sacrifice? Who will
meditate upon us? Who will bless us? Who will receive us with
meat and clothes in his hand and with a prayer worthy of bliss?
Of which of us will the name be taken for invocation? Of which
of you will the soul be worshipped by you with a sacrifice? To
whom will this gift of ours be given, that he may have never-failing
food for ever and ever?'

51.
And the man who offers them up a sacrifice, with meat and
clothes in his hand, with a prayer worthy of bliss, the awful
Fravashis of the faithful, satisfied, unharmed, and unoffended,
bless thus:

52.
'May there be in this house flocks of animals and men! May
there be a swift horse and a solid chariot! May there be a man
who knows how to praise God and rule in an assembly, who will
offer us sacrifices with meat and clothes in his hand, and with
a prayer worthy of bliss.'

XIV.

53.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who show beautiful paths to the waters, made by Mazda, which had
stood before for a long time in the same place without flowing:

54.
And now they flow along the path made by Mazda, along the
way made by the gods, the watery way appointed to them, at the
wish of Ahura Mazda, at the wish of the Amesha-Spentas.

XV.

55.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who show a beautiful growth to the fertile plants, which had stood
before for a long time in the same place without growing;

56.
And now they grow up along the path made by Mazda, along the
way made by the gods, in the time appointed to them, at the wish
of Ahura Mazda, at the wish of the Amesha-Spentas.

XVI.

57.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who showed their paths to the stars, the moon, the sun, and the
endless lights, that had stood before for a long time in the same
place, without moving forwards, through the oppression of the
Daevas and the assaults of the Daevas.

58.
And now they move around in their far-revolving circle for
ever, till they come to the time of the good restoration of the
world.

XVII.

59.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who watch over the bright sea Vouru-Kasha, to the number of ninety
thousand, and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and ninety-nine.

XVIII.

60.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who watch over the stars Haptoiringa, to the number of ninety
thousand, and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and ninety-nine.

XIX.

61.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who watch over the body of Keresaspa, the son of Sama, the club-bearer
with plaited hair, to the number of ninety thousand, and nine
thousand, and nine hundred, and ninety-nine.

XX.

62.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who watch over the seed of the holy Zarathushtra, to the number
of ninety thousand, and nine thousand, and nine hundred, and ninety-nine.

XXI.

63.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who fight at the right hand of the reigning lord, if he rejoices
the faithful and if the awful Fravashis of the faithful are not
hurt by him, if they are rejoiced by him, unharmed and unoffended.

XXII.

64.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who are greater, who are stronger, who are swifter, who are more
powerful, who are more victorious, who are more healing, who are
more effective than can be expressed by words; who run by tens
of thousands into the midst of the Myazdas.

65.
And when the waters come up from the sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! along with the Glory made by Mazda, then forwards
come the awful Fravashis of the faithful, many and many hundreds,
many and many thousands, many and many tens of thousands,

66.
Seeking water for their own kindred, for their own borough,
for their own town, for their own country, and saying thus: 'May
our own country have a good store and full joy!'

67.
They fight in the battles that are fought in their own place
and land, each according to the place and house where he dwelt
(of yore): they look like a gallant warrior who, girded up and
watchful, fights for the hoard he has treasured up.

68.
And those of them who win bring waters to their own kindred,
to their own borough, to their own town, to their own country,
saying thus: 'May my country grow and increase!'

69.
And when the all-powerful sovereign of a country has been
surprised by his foes and haters, he invokes them, the awful Fravashis
of the faithful.

70.
And they come to his help, if they have not been hurt by him,
if they have been rejoiced by him, if they have not been harmed
nor offended, the awful Fravashis of the faithful: they come flying
unto him, it seems as if they were well-winged birds.

71.
They come in as a weapon and as a shield, to keep him behind
and to keep him in front, from the Druj unseen, from the female
Varenya fiend, from the evil-doer bent on mischief, and from that
fiend who is all death, Angra Mainyu. It will be as if there were
a thousand men watching over one man;

72.
So that neither the sword well-thrust, neither the club well-falling,
nor the arrow well-shot, nor the spear well-darted, nor the stones
flung from the arm shall destroy him.

73.
They come on this side, they come on that side, never resting,
the good, powerful, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful, asking
for help thus: 'Who will praise us? Who will offer us a sacrifice?
Who will meditate upon us? Who will bless us? Who will receive
us with meat and clothes in his hand and with a prayer worthy
of bliss? Of which of us will the name be taken for invocation?
Of which of you will the soul be worshipped by you with a sacrifice?
To whom will that gift of ours be given, that he may have never-failing
food for ever and ever?'

74.
We worship the perception; we worship the intellect; we worship
the conscience; we worship those of the Saoshyants;

We worship the souls; those of the tame animals; those of the
wild animals; those of the animals that live in the waters; those
of the animals that live under the ground; those of the flying
ones; those of the running ones; those of the grazing ones.

We worship their Fravashis.

75.
We worship the Fravashis.

We worship them, the liberal;

We worship them, the valiant; we worship them, the most valiant;

We worship them, the beneficent; we worship them, the most beneficent;

We worship them, the powerful;

We worship them, the most strong;

We worship them, the light; we worship them, the most light;

We worship them, the effective; we worship them, the most effective.

76.
They are the most effective amongst the creatures of the two
Spirits, they the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful,
who stood holding fast when the two Spirits created the world,
the Good Spirit and the Evil One.

77.
When Angra Mainyu broke into the creation of the good holiness,
then came in across Vohu Mano and Atar.

78.
They destroyed the malice of the fiend Angra Mainyu, so that
the waters did not stop flowing nor did the plants stop growing;
but at once the most beneficent waters of the creator and ruler,
Ahura Mazda, flowed forward and his plants went on growing.

79.
We worship all the waters;

We worship all the plants;

We worship all the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful.

We worship the waters by their names;

We worship the plants by their names;

We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful
by their names.

80.
Of all those ancient Fravashis, we worship the Fravashi of
Ahura Mazda; who is the greatest, the best, the fairest, the most
solid, the wisest, the finest of body and supreme in holiness;

81.
Whose soul is the Mathra Spenta, who is white, shining, seen
afar; and we worship the beautiful forms, the active forms wherewith
he clothes the Amesha-Spentas; we worship the swift-horsed sun.

XXIII.

82.
We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the Amesha-Spentas,
the bright ones, whose looks perform what they wish, the tall,
quickly coming to do, strong, and lordly, who are undecaying and
holy;

83.
Who are all seven of one thought, who are all seven of one
speech, who are all seven of one deed; whose thought is the same,
whose speech is the same, whose deed is the same, whose father
and commander is the same, namely, the Maker, Ahura Mazda;

84.
Who see one another's soul thinking of good thoughts, thinking
of good words, thinking of good deeds, thinking of Garo-nmana,
and whose ways are shining as they go down towards the libations.

XXIV.

85. We worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis: that of
the most rejoicing fire, the beneficent and assembly-making; and
that of the holy, strong Sraosha, who is the incarnate Word, a
mighty-speared and lordly god; and that of Nairyo-sangha.

86.
And that of Rashnu Razishta;

That of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures;

That of the Mathra-Spenta;

That of the sky;

That of the waters;

That of the earth;

That of the plants;

That of the Bull;

That of the living man;

That of the holy creation.

87.
We worship the Fravashi of Gaya Maretan [Gayomard], who first listened
unto the thought and teaching of Ahura Mazda; of whom Ahura formed
the race of the Aryan nations, the seed of the Aryan nations.

We worship the piety and the Fravashi of the holy Zarathushtra;

88.
Who first thought what is good, who first spoke what is good,
who first did what is good; who was the first Priest, the first
Warrior, the first Plougher of the ground; who first knew and
first taught; who first possessed and first took possession of
the Bull, of Holiness, of the Word, the obedience to the Word,
and dominion, and all the good things made by Mazda, that are
the offspring of the good Principle;

89. Who was the first Priest, the first Warrior, the first Plougher
of the ground; who first took the
turning of the wheel
from the
hands of the Daeva and of the cold-hearted man; who first in the
material world pronounced the praise of Asha, thus bringing the
Daevas to naught, and confessed himself a worshipper of Mazda,
a follower of Zarathushtra, one who hates the Daevas, and obeys
the laws of Ahura.

5. The wheel of sovereignty (?); cf.
Yt10.67
; this expression
smacks of Buddhism.

90.
Who first in the material world said the word that destroys
the Daevas, the law of Ahura; who first in the material world
proclaimed the word that destroys the Daevas, the law of Ahura;
who first in the material world declared all the creation of the
Daevas unworthy of sacrifice and prayer; who was strong, giving
all the good things of life, the first bearer of the Law amongst
the nations;

91.
In whom was heard the whole Mathra, the word of holiness;
who was the lord and master of the world, the praiser of the most
great, most good and most fair Asha; who had a revelation of the
Law, that most excellent of all beings;

92.
For whom the Amesha-Spentas longed, in one accord with the
sun, in the fulness of faith of a devoted heart; they longed for
him, as the lord and master of the world, as the praiser of the
most great, most good, and most fair Asha, as having a revelation
of the Law, that most excellent of all beings;

93.
In whose birth and growth the waters and the plants rejoiced;
in whose birth and growth the waters and the plants grew; in whose
birth and growth all the creatures of the good creations cried
out, Hail!

94.
'Hail to us! for he is born, the Athravan, Spitama Zarathushtra.
Zarathushtra will offer us sacrifices with libations and bundles
of baresma; and there will the good Law of the worshippers of
Mazda come and spread through all the seven Karshvares of the
earth.

95.
'There will Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, increase all
the excellences of our countries, and allay their troubles; there
will the powerful Apam-Napat increase all the excellences of our
countries, and allay their troubles.'

We worship the piety and Fravashi of Maidhyo-maungha, the son
of Arasti, who first listened unto the word and teaching of Zarathushtra.

XXV.

96.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asmo-hvanvant;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asan-hvanvant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gavayan.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Parshat-gaush. the son of
Frata;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohvasti, the son of Snaoya;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Isvat, the son of Varaza.

97.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Saena, the son of Ahum-stut,
who first appeared upon this earth with a hundred pupils.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fradhidaya.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usmanara, the son of Paeshata.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-raochah, the son of Franya;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asho-raochah, the son of Franya;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varesmo-raochah, the son of
Franya.

98.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Isat-vastra, the son of
Zarathushtra;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Urvatat-nara, the son of Zarathushtra;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvare-chithra, the son of
Zarathushtra.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Daevo-tbis, the son of Takhma.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thrimithwant, the son of Spitama.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Daungha, the son of Zairita.

99.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Vistaspa; the gallant
one, who was the incarnate Word, the mighty-speared, and lordly
one; who, driving the Druj before him, sought wide room for the
holy religion; who, driving the Druj before him, made wide room
for the holy religion, who made himself the arm and support of
this law of Ahura, of this law of Zarathushtra.

100.
Who took her, standing bound, from the hands of the Hunus,
and established her to sit in the middle [of the world], high
ruling, never falling back, holy, nourished with plenty of cattle
and pastures, blessed with plenty of cattle and pastures.

101.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zairi-vairi;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yukhta-vairi;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Sriraokhshan;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Keresaokhshan;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vanara;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varaza;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Bujisravah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Berezyarshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Tizyarshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Perethu-arshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vizhyarshti.

102.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Naptya;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vazhaspa;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Habaspa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vistauru, the son of Naotara.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frash-ham-vareta;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frasho-kareta.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-vanu;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-pata;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-data;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-chithra;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-hvarenah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-savah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-zantu;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Atare-danghu.

103.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hushkyaothna;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pishkyaothna;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant Spento-data.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Basta-vairi;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kava-razem.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frashaoshtra, the son of Hvova;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Jamaspa, the son of Hvova;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Avaraoshtri.

104.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hushkyaothna, the son
of Frashaoshtra;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvadaena, the son of Frashaoshtra.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hanghaurvaungh, the son of
Jamaspa;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vareshna, the son of Hanghaurvaungh.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-nemah, the son of Avaraoshtri,

To withstand evil dreams, to withstand evil visions, to withstand
evil ....(?), to withstand the evil Pairikas.

105.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Mathravaka, the son of
Simaezhi, the Aethrapati, the Hamidhpati, who was able to smite
down most of the evil, unfaithful Ashemaoghas, that shout the
hymns, and acknowledge no lord and no master, the dreadful ones
whose Fravashis are to be broken; to withstand the evil done by
the faithful.

106.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-stu, the son of Maidhyo-maungha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Avarethrabah, the son of Rastare-vaghant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Bujra, the son of Dazgaraspa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zbaurvant;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant Karesna, the son
of Zbaurvant; who was the incarnate Word, mighty-speared and lordly;

107.
In whose house did walk the good, beautiful, shining Ashi
Vanguhi, in the shape of a maid fair of body, most strong, tall-formed,
high-up girded, pure, nobly born of a glorious seed; who, rushing
to the battle, knew how to make room for himself with his own
arms; who, rushing to the battle, knew how to fight the foe with
his own arms.

108.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Viraspa, the son of Karesna;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Azata, the son of Karesna:

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frayaodha, the son of Karesna.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and good Arshya; Arshya, the
chief in assemblies, the most energetic of the worshippers of
Mazda.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Darayat-ratha;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frayat-ratha;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Skarayat-ratha.

109.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Arshvant;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vyarshvant;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paityarshvant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Amru;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Chamru.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Dratha;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paiti-dratha;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paiti-vangha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frasha-vakhsha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Nemo-vanghu, the son of Vaedhayangha.

110.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Visadha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-vanghu, the son of Bivandangha;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Jaro-danghu, the son of Pairishtira;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Neremyazdana, the son of Athwyoza.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Berezishnu, the son of Ara;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kasupatu, the son of Ara.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frya.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ASTVAT-ERETA.

XXVI.

111.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gaopi-vanghu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant Ham-baretar vanghvam.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Staotar-Vahishtahe-Ashyehe.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pouru-dhakhshti, the son of
Khshtavaenya;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Khshoi-wraspa, the son of
Khshtavaenya.

112.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ayo-asti, the son of Pouru-dhakhshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohv-asti, the son of Pouru-dhakhshti;

We-worship the Fravashi of the holy Gaya-dhasti, the son of Pouru-dhakhshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-vazdah, the son of Pouru-dhakhshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Urudhu, the son of Pouru-dhakhshti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Khshathro-chinah, the son
of Khshvoi-wraspa.

113.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ashahura, the son of Jishti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraya-zanta;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frenah, the son of Frayazanta;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Jaro-vanghu, the son of Frayazanta.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Asha-vazdah and Thrita, the
sons of Sayuzhdri.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-raochah, the son of Varakasa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Arejan-ghant, the Turanian.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usinemah.

114.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yukhtaspa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-skyaothna, the son of
Gayadhasti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-nemah, the son of Katu;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-vazdah, the son of Katu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-saredha, the son of Asha-sairyach;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-saredha, the son of Zairyach.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Chakhshni.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Syavaspi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pourushti, the son of Kavi.

115.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varesmapa, the son of
Janara.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Nanarasti, the son of Paeshatah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zarazdati, the son of Paeshatah.

We worship tke Fravashi of the holy Gaevani, the son of Vohu-nemah.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Arezva and Sruta-spadha

We worship the Fravashis Of the holy Zrayah and Spento-khratu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varshni, the son of Vagereza.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frachya, the son of Taurvati.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vahmae-data, the son of Mathravaka,

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ushtra, the son of Sadhanah.

116.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Danghu-sruta;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Danghu-fradhah.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aspo-padho-makhshti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Payanghro-makhshti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ushtazanta.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asha-savah,

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asho-urvatha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Haomo-hvarenah.

117.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frava.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usnaka.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvanvant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Daeno-vazah.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Arejaona.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aiwi-hvarenah.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Huyazata.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hare-dhaspa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pazinah.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvakhshathra.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asho-paoirya,

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ASTVAT-ERETA.

XXVII.

118.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hugau.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Anghuyu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gauri;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yushta, the son of Gauri [or, the holy Gaorayana].

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Mazdra-vanghu;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Srira-vanghu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ayuta.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Suro-yazata.

119.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Eredhwa

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kavi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshan, the son of the great
Vidi-sravah, known afar.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vanghu-dhata, the son of Hvadhata;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Uzya, the son of Vanghu-dhata;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frya.

120.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy one whose name is Ashem-yenhe-raochau;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy one whose name is Ashem-yenhe-vereza;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy one whose name is Ashem-yahmai-ushta.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yoishta, of the Fryana house.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usmanara, the son of Paeshatah
Paitisrira, to withstand the evil done by one's kindred.

121.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Spiti, the son of Uspasnu;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Erezraspa, the son of Uspasnu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Usadhan, the son of Mazdayasna.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fradat-vanghu, the son of
Stivant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Raochas-chaeshman;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvare-chaeshman

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frasrutara;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Visrutara.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Baremna. We worship the Fravashi
of the holy Visruta.

122.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvaspa;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Chathwaraspa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Dawra-maeshi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fraora-ostra [Fraoraosa], the son of Kaosha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frinaspa, the son of Kaeva.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fradat-nara, the son of Gravaratu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-ushtra, the son of Akhnangha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vivare-shvant, the son of Ainyu.

123.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frarazi, the son of Tura.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Stipi, the son of Ravant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Parshanta, the son of Gandarewa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Avahya, the son of Spenta [Spengha].

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aeta [Aetava], the son of Mayu [Mayava];

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yaetush-gau, the son of Vyatana.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Garshta, the son of Kavi.

124.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pouru-bangha, the son
of Zaosha.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-data, the son of Kata.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Baungha, the son of Saungha [Saunghangha].

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Hvareza and Ankasa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aravaoshtra, the son of Erezvat-danghu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frachithra, the son of Berezvant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vohu-peresa, the son of Ainyu.

125.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Paro-dasma, the son of
Dashtaghni, a Miza [Muzha] man of the Miza [Muzha] land.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Fratira [Fratura] and Baeshatastira [Baeshatastura].

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and pure Avare-gau, the son
of Aoighimatastira [Aoikhmatastura].

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Gaomant, the son of Zavan,
a Raozhdya man of the Raozhdya land.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thrit, the son of Aevo-saredha-fyaeshta,
a Tanya man of the Tanya land.

126.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Tiro-nakathwa, of the
Uspaeshta-Saena house.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Utayuti Vit-kavi, the son
of Zighri, of the Saena house;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Frohakafra, the son of Merezishmya,
of the Saena house.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varesmo-raochah, the son of
Perethu-afzem.

127.
We worship the Fravashis of the holy Asha-nemah and Vidat-gau,
of this country.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy Par-shat-gau and Dazgara-gau,
of the Apakhshira country.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hufra-vakhsh, of the Kahrkana
house.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Akayadha, of the Pidha house.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Jamaspa, the younger.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Maidhyo-maungha, the younger.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Urvatat-nara, the younger.

128.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Raochas-chaeshman;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvare-chaeshman;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fradat-hvarenah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Varedat-hvarenah [Vidhat-hvarenah];

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vouru-nemah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vouru-savah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshyat-ereta;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshyat-nemah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy ASTVAT-ERETA;

XXVIII.

129.
Whose name will be the victorious SAOSHYANT and whose name
will be Astvat-ereta. He will be SAOSHYANT (the Beneficent One),
because he will benefit the whole bodily world; he will be ASTVAT-ERETA
(he who makes the bodily creatures rise up), because as a bodily
creature and as a living creature he will stand against the destruction
of the bodily creatures, to withstand the Druj of the two-footed
brood, to withstand the evil done by the faithful.

XXIX.

130.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Yima, the son of Vivanghant;
the valiant Yima, who had flocks at his wish; to stand against
the oppression caused by the Daevas, against the drought that
destroys pastures, and against death that creeps unseen.

131.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thraetaona, of the Athwya
house; to stand against itch, hot fever, humours, cold fever,
and incontinency, to stand against the evil done by the Serpent.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aoshnara, the son of Pouru-jira.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Uzava, the son of Tumaspa.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Aghraeratha, the demi-man.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Manushchithra, the son of
Airyu.

132.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Kavata;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Aipivanghu;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Usadhan;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Arshan;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pisanah [Pisinah];

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Byarshan;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Syavarshan;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy king Husravah [Haosravah];

133.
For the well-shapened Strength, for the Victory made by Ahura,
for the crushing Ascendant for the righteousness of the law, for
the innocence of the law, for the unconquerable power of the law;
for the extermination of the enemies at one stroke;

134.
And for the vigour of health, for the Glory made by Mazda,
for the health of the body, and for a good, virtuous offspring,
wise, chief in assemblies, bright, and clear-eyed, that frees
[their father] from the pangs [of hell], of good intellect; and
for that part in the blessed world that falls to wisdom and to
those who do not follow impiety;

135.
For a dominion full of splendour, for a long, long life, and
for all boons and remedies; to withstand the Yatus and Pairikas,
the oppressors, the blind, and the deaf; to withstand the evil
done by oppressors.

136.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Keresaspa, the Sama, the
club-bearer with plaited hair; to withstand the dreadful arm and
the hordes with the wide battle array, with the many spears, with
the straight spears, with the spears uplifted, bearing the spears
of havoc; to withstand the dreadful brigand who works destruction,
the man-slayer who has no mercy; to withstand the evil done by
the brigand.

137.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Akhrura, the son of Husravah;

To withstand the wicked one that deceives his friend and the niggard
that causes the destruction of the world.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy and gallant Haoshyangha;

To withstand tke Mazainya Daevas and the Varenya fiends; to withstand
the evil done by the Daevas.

138.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Fradhakhshti, the son
of the jar,

To withstand Aeshma, the fiend of the wounding spear, and the
Daevas that grow through Aeshma; to withstand the evil done by
Aeshma.

XXX.

139.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvovi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Freni;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Thriti;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Pouruchista.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hutaosa;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Huma [Humaya].

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Zairichi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Vispa-taurvashi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ushtavaiti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Tushnamaiti.

140.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy Freni, the wife of Usenemah;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Freni, the wife of the son
of Frayazanta;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Freni, the wife of the son
of Khshoiwraspa;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Freni, the wife of Gayadhasti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Asabani [Asabana], the wife of Pourudhakhsti.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Ukhshyeinti, the wife of Staotar-Vahishtahe-Ashyehe.

141.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Vadhut.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Jaghrudh.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Franghadh.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Urudhayant.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Paesanghanu.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Hvaredhi.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Huchithra.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy Kanuka.

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Srutat-fedhri.

142.
We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Vanghu-fedhri;

We worship the Fravashi of the holy maid Eredat-fedhri, who is
called Vispa-taurvairi. She is Vispa-taurvairi (the all-destroying)
because she will bring him forth, who will destroy the malice
of Daevas and men, to withstand the evil done by the Jahi.

143.
We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Aryan countries;

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Aryan countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Turanian countries;

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Turanian countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Sairimyan countries;

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Sairimyan countries.

144.
We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Sairimyan
countries;

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Saini countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in the Dahi countries;

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in the Dahi countries.

We worship the Fravashis of the holy men in all countries;

We worship the Fravashis of the holy women in all countries.

145.
We worship all the good, awful, beneficent Fravashis of the
faithful, from Gaya Mareta [Gayomard] down to the victorious Saoshyant. May
the Fravashis of the faithful come quickly to us! May they come
to our help!

146.
They protect us when in distress with manifest assistance,
with the assistance of Ahura Mazda and of the holy, powerful Sraosha,
and with the Mathra-Spenta, the all-knowing, who hates the Daevas
with a mighty hate, a friend of Ahura Mazda, whom Zarathushtra
worshipped so greatly in the material world.

147.
May the good waters and the plants and the Fravashis of the
faithful abide down here! May you be rejoiced and well received
in this house! Here are the Athravans of the countries, thinking
of good holiness. Our hands are lifted up for asking help, and
for offering a sacrifice unto you, O most beneficent Fravashis!

148.
We worship the Fravashis of all the holy men and holy women
whose souls are worthy of sacrifice, whose Fravashis are worthy
of invocation.

We worship the Fravashis of all the holy men and holy women, our
sacrificing to whom makes us good in the eyes of Akura Mazda:
of all of those we have heard that Zarathushtra is the first and
best, as a follower of Ahura and as a performer of the law.

149.
We worship the spirit, conscience, perception, soul, and Fravashi
of men of the primitive law, of the first who listened to the
teaching (of Ahura), holy men and holy women, who struggled for
holiness; we worship the spirit, conscience, perception, soul,
and Fravashi of our next-of-kin, holy men and holy women, who
struggled for holiness.

150.
We worship the men of the primitive law who will be in these
houses, boroughs, towns, and countries;

We worship the men of the primitive law who have been in these
houses, boroughs, towns, and countries;

We worship the men of the primitive law who are in these houses,
boroughs, towns, and countries.

151.
We worship the men of the primitive law in all houses, boroughs,
towns, and countries, who obtained these houses, who obtained
these boroughs, who obtained these towns, who obtained these countries,
who obtained holiness, who obtained the Mathra, who obtained the
[blessedness of the] soul, who obtained all the perfections of
goodness.

152.
We worship Zarathushtra, the lord and master of all the material
world, the man of the primitive law; the wisest of all-beings,
the best-ruling of all beings, the brightest of all beings, the
most glorious of all beings, the most worthy of sacrifice amongst
all beings, the most worthy of prayer amongst all beings, the
most worthy of propitiation amongst all beings, the most worthy
of glorification amongst all beings, whom we call well-desired
and worthy of sacrifice and prayer as much as any being can be,
in the perfection of his holiness.

153.
We worship this earth; we worship those heavens;

We worship those good things that stand between (the earth and
the heavens) and that are worthy of sacrifice and prayer and are
to be worshipped by the faithful man.

154.
We worship the souls of the wild beasts and of the tame.

We worship the souls of the holy men and women, born at any time,
whose consciences struggle, or will struggle, or have. struggled,
for the good.

155.
We worship the spirit, conscience, perception, soul, and Fravashi
of the holy men and holy women who struggle, will struggle, or
have struggled, and teach the Law and who have struggled for holiness.

Yenhe hatam: All those beings to whom Ahura Mazda...

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

156.
The Fravashis of the faithful, awful and overpowering, awful
and victorious; the Fravashis of the men of the primitive law;
the Fravashis of the next-of-kin; may these Fravashis come satisfied
into this house, may they walk satisfied through this house!

157.
May they, being satisfied, bless this house with the presence
of the kind Ashi Vanguhi! May they leave this house satisfied!
May they carry back from here hymns and worship to the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, and the Amesha-Spentas! May they not leave this house
of us, the worshippers of Mazda, complaining!

158.
Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the awful, overpowering Fravashis of the faithful; of the Fravashis
of the men of the primitive law; of the Fravashis of the next-of-kin.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

Yt13

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 14
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt14sbe.htm
================================================================================

yt14sbe

Glossary

AVESTA: YASHTS (Hymns of praise)

Edited by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995. Spelling has been changed to conform with
other texts in this series.

XIV. WARHARAN YASHT

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Regarding Wargaran [Behram, Verethraghna], the Genius of Victory, see
Vend. Introd. V, 8.

This Yasht can be divided into four parts:—

I (§§ 1-28). An enumeration of the ten incarnations in whivh
Verethraghna appeared to Zarathushtra (as a wind, § 2; as a bull,
§ 7; as a horse, § 9; as a camel, § 11; as a boar, § 15; as a
youth, § 17; as a raven, § 19; as a ram, § 23; as a buck, § 25;
and as a man, § 27).

II (§§ 30-33). The power given by Verethraghna to his worshipper,
Zarathushtra.

III (§§ 34-46). The magical powers, ascribed to the raven's
feather, of striking terror into an army and dispersing it (the raven
being the seventh incarnation of Verethraghna).

IV (§§ 47-64). The glorification of Verethraghna.

0. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Hawan],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto Verethraghna, made by Mazda, and unto
the crushing Ascendant;

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1. Sirozah 1.20.

I.

1. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

2. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him first, running in
the shape of a strong, beautiful wind, made by Mazda; he bore
the good Glory, made by Mazda, the Glory made by Mazda, that is
both health and strength.

3. Then he, who is the strongest,
said unto him:

'I am the strongest
in strength; I am the most victorious in victory; I am the most
glorious in glory; I am the most favouring in favour; I am the
best giver of welfare: I am the best-healing in health-giving.

2. Verethraghna.

3. Zarathushtra.

4. 'And I shall destroy the malice of all the malicious, the
malice of Daevas and men, of the 'Yatus and Pairikas, of the oppressors,
the blind, and the deaf.

5. 'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard; namely, unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura. We
worship Verethraghna, made by Ahura, with an offering of libations,
according to the primitive ordinances of Ahura; with the Haoma
and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells,
the speech, the deeds, the libations, and the rightly-spoken words.

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

II.

6. 'We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.'

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

7. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the second time,
running in the shape of a beautiful bull, with yellow ears and
golden horns; upon whose horns floated the well-shapen Strength,
and Victory, beautiful of form, made by Ahura: thus did he come,
bearing the good Glory, made by Mazda, the Glory made by Mazda,
that is both health and strength.

Then he, who is the strongest, said unto him: 'I am the strongest
in strength....,

'And I shall destroy the malice of all malicious....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

4. As above, § 3.

5. As above, § 4.

6. As above, § 5.

III.

8. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

9. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the third time, running
in the shape of a white, beautiful horse, with yellow ears and
a golden caparison; upon whose forehead floated the well-shapen
Strength, and Victory, beautiful of form, made by Ahura: thus
did he come, bearing the good Glory, made by Mazda, that is both
health and strength.

Then he, who is the strongest, said unto him: 'I am the strongest
in strength....

'And I shall destroy the malice of all malicious....'

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

IV.

10. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, 'Who is the best-armed of
the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

11. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the fourth time,
running in the shape of a burden-bearing
camel,
sharp-toothed,

swift ....,
stamping forwards, long-haired, and living in the
abodes of men;

12. Who of all males in rut shows greatest strength and greatest
fire, when he goes to his females. Of all females those are best
kept whom a burden-bearing camel keeps, who has thick forelegs
and large humps, ....,
quick-eyed, long-headed, bright, tall,
and strong;

13. Whose piercing look goes afar ....,

even in the dark of the night; who throws white foam
along his mouth; well-kneed, well-footed,
standing with the countenance of an all-powerful master:

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda, the
Glory made by Mazda....

7. Doubtful (vadharôish).

8. Doubtful (dadãsôish).

9. ? Urvatô; cf. § 19.

10. Tame, domesticated.

11. ? Smarshnô.

12. ? Haitahê.

V.

14. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'Who is the
best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is
Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

15. 'Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the fifth time,
running in the shape of a boar, opposing the foes, a sharp-toothed
he-boar, a sharp-jawed boar, that kills at one stroke, pursuing,
wrathful, with a dripping face,
strong, and swift to run, and
rushing all around.

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda,
the Glory made by Mazda.

13. Cf. Yt10.70.

14. Or better, rushing before. Cf. Yt10.127.

VI.

16. We sacrifice unto Verethragna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda,
most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world,
thou Holy One!

'Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna,
made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

17. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the sixth time, running
in the shape of a beautiful youth of fifteen, shining, clear-eyed,
thin-heeled.

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda,
the Glory made by Mazda....

VII.

18. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

19. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the seventh time,
running in the shape of a raven
that ...
below and ...
above,
and that is the swiftest of all birds, the lightest of the flying
creatures.

20. He alone of living things, — he or none, —
overtakes the flight
of an arrow, however well it has been shot. He flies up joyfully
at the first break of dawn, wishing the night to be no more, wishing
the dawn, that has not yet come, to come.

21. He grazes the hidden ways

of the mountains, he grazes the
tops of the mountains, he grazes the depths of the vales, he grazes
the summits
of the trees, listening to the voices of the birds.

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda,

the Glory made by Mazda.

15. ? Urvatô, pishatô.

16. The raven was sacred to Appollo. The priests of the sun in Persia
are said to have been named ravens (Porphyry). Cf. Georgica I, 45.

17. Reading vîgâtavô.

18. Doubtful.

19. The royal Glory (khwarrah, Av. khwarenah) is described flying in the
shape of a raven, Yt19.35.

VIII.

22. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world. thou Holy One!

Who is the
best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

23. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the eighth time,
running in the shape of a wild, beautiful ram, with horns bent
round.

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda,

the Glory made by Mazda....

20. Doubtful.

21. While Ardashir, the founder of the Sasanian dynasty, was flying
from Ardavan, a beautiful wild ram ran after him and overtook him,
and Ardavan understood from this that the kingly Glory had left
him and had passed over to his rival (
Shah Nameh
, Ardashir;

Karnamag-i Ardashir 3.11-15
,
tr. Noeldeke, p. 45.)

IX.

24. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama Zarathushtra!'

25. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the ninth time, running
in the shape of a beautiful, fighting buck, with sharp horns.

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda,
the Glory made by Mazda....

X.

26. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'Who is the best-armed of the heavenly gods?'

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is Verethraghna, made by Ahura, O Spitama
Zarathushtra!'

27. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, came to him the tenth time, running
in the shape of a man, bright and beautiful, made by Mazda: he
held a sword with a golden blade, inlaid with all sorts of ornaments.

Thus did Verethraghna come, bearing the good Glory made by Mazda,
the Glory made by Mazda.

XI.

28. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura, who makes virility,
who makes death, who makes resurrection, who possesses peace,
who has a free way.

Unto him did the holy Zarathushtra offer up a sacrifice, [asking]
for victorious thinking, victorious speaking, victorious doing,
victorious addressing, and victorious answering.

29. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, gave him the fountains of manliness,

the strength of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the Kara fish,
that lives
beneath the waters and can measure
a rippling of the water, not
thicker than a hair, in the Rangha whose ends lie afar, whose
depth is a thousand times the height of a man.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

22. Erezi, Pahl. gond (Old Zand-Pahlavi Dictionary, p. 11).

23. See Vd. 19.22.

24. Possibly, perceive.

25. Cf. Yt. 16.7 and Bundashishn 18.6: 'those fish ...
know the scratch of a needle's point (or better hole) by which the
water shall increase, or by which it is diminished' (tr. West).

XII.

30. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura, who makes virility,
who makes death, who makes resurrection, who possesses peace,
who has a free way.

Unto him did the holy Zarathushtra offer up a sacrifice, [asking]
for victorious thinking, victorious speaking, victorious doing,
victorious addressing, and victorious answering.

31. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, gave him the fountains of manliness,
the strength of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the male horse, that,
in the dark of the night, in its first half

and through the rain,
can perceive a horse's hair lying on the ground and knows whether
it is from the head or from the tail.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

26. Cf. Yt. 15.10, and Bundahishn 19.32: 'Regarding the Arab
horse, they say that if, in a dark night, a single hair occurs
on the groound, he sees it' (tr. West).

XIII.

32. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura, who makes virility,
who makes death, who makes resurrection, who possesses peace,
who has a free way.

Unto him did the holy Zarathushtra sacrifice, [asking] for victorious
thinking, victorious speaking, victorious doing, victorious addressing,
and victorious answering.

33. Verethraghna, made by Ahura, gave him the fountains of virility,
the strength of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the vulture with a golden
collar,
that, from as far as nine districts,
can perceive a piece
of flesh not thicker than the fist, giving just as much light
as a needle gives, as the point of a needle gives.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

27. Possibly the Gypaetus, the vautour doré.

28. 'Even from his highest flight, he (the vulture) sees when
flesh the size of a fist is on the ground' (Bund. 19.31; tr. West).
Cf. Horapollo.

XIV.

34. We sacrifice unto Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'If I have a curse thrown upon me, a spell told upon me by the
many men who hate me, what is the remedy for it?'

35. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Take thou a feather of that
bird with ...
feathers, the Varenjana,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! With that feather thou shalt
rub thy own body,
with that feather thou shalt
curse back thy enemies.

36. 'If a man holds a bone of that strong bird, or a feather of
that strong bird, no one can smite or turn to flight that fortunate
man. The feather of that bird of birds brings him help; it brings
unto him the homage of men, it maintains in him his glory.

37. 'Then the sovereign, the lord of countries, will no longer
kill his
hundreds, though he is a killer of men;
the ....
will
not kill at one stroke; he alone smites and goes forwards.

38. 'All tremble before him who holds the feather, they tremble
therefore before me; all my enemies tremble before me and fear
my strength and victorious force and the fierceness established
in my body.

39. 'He
carries the chariot of the lords; he carries the chariots
of the lordly ones, the chariots of the sovereigns. He carried
the chariot of Kavi Usa;
upon his wings runs
the male horse,

runs the burden-bearing camel, runs the water of the river.

40. 'Him rode the gallant Thraetaona, who smote Azhi Dahaka, the
three-mouthed, the three-headed, the six-eyed, who had a thousand
senses; that most powerful, fiendish Druj, that demon, baleful
to the world, the strongest Druj that Angra Mainyu created against
the material world, to destroy the world of the good principle.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

29. Pesho-parena. The Varenjana is the same bird as the Varaghna,
the raven.

30. The feather of the Varenjana plays here the same part as the
Simurgh's feather in the <>Shah Nameh. When Rudabah's flank
was opened to bring forth Rustam, her would was healed by rubbing it with
a Simurgh's feather; Rustam, wounded to death by Isfendyar, was cured
in the same manner.

31. Of him who holds that feather.

32. ? Vaêsaêpa.

33. That bird.

34. Kai Kaus; when he tried to ascend to heaven on a throne carried by eagles
(Journal Asiatique, 1881, I, 513).

35. A metaphor to exppress the swiftness of the wind, of the camel,
and of the rivers.

Cf. Yt. 5.34.

XV.

41. 'We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

'Verethraghna confounds the glory of this house with its wealth
in cattle. He is like that great bird, the Saena;

he is like the big clouds, full of water, that beat the mountains.

'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

36. The Simurgh; see above, note 30.

XVI.

42. 'We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.'

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world thou Holy One!

'Where is it
that we must invoke the name of Verethraghna, made by Ahura? Where
is it that we must praise him? That we must humbly praise him?'

43. Ahura Mazda answered: 'When armies meet together in full array,
O Spitama Zarathushtra! (asking) which of the two is the party
that conquers and is not crushed, that smites and is not smitten;

44. 'Do thou throw
four feathers
in the way.
Whichever of the
two will first worship the well-shapen Strength, and Verethraghna,
beautiful of form. made by Mazda, on his side will victory stand.

45. 'I will bless Strength and Victory, the two keepers, the two
good keepers, the two maintainers; the two who ...,
the two who
...
the two who ...
;
the two who forgive, the two who strike off,
the two who forget.

46. 'O Zarathushtra! let not that spell be shown to any one, except
by the father to his son, or by the brother to his brother from
the same womb, or by the Athravan to his pupil.

These are words
that are awful and powerful, awful and assembly-ruling, awful
and victorious, awful and healing: these are words that save the
head that was lost and chant away the uplifted weapon.'

37. Doubtful.

38. Or an arrow feathered with four Varenjana's feathers.

39. Â-dhwaozhen, vî-dhwaozen, fra-dhwaozen.

40. Âmarezen, cf. Pers. âmarzidan; vîmarezen, cf. Yt. 1.2;
fra marezen, cf. Pers. farmush.

41. Cf. Yt. 4.10.

XVII.

47. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura: who goes along
the armies arrayed, and goes here and there asking, along with
Mithra and Rashnu:
'Who is it who lies unto Mithra? Who is it who
thrusts [his oath] against Rashnu?

To whom shall I, in my might, impart illness and death?'

48.
Ahura Mazda said: 'If men sacrifice unto
Verethraghna, made by Ahura, if the due sacrifice
and prayer is offered unto him
just as it ought to be performed in the perfection of holiness,
never will a hostile horde enter the Aryan countries, nor any
plague, nor leprosy, nor venomous plants, nor the chariot of a
foe, nor the uplifted spear of a foe.

49.
Zarathushtra asked: 'What is then, O Ahura Mazda! the sacrifice
and invocation in honour of Verethraghna, made by Ahura, as it
ought to be performed in the perfection of holiness?'

50. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Let the Aryan nations bring libations
unto him; let the Aryan nations tie bundles of baresma for him;
let the Aryan nations cook for him a head of cattle, either white,
or black, or of any other colour, but all of one and the same
colour.

51. 'Let not a murderer take of those offerings, nor a whore,
nor a ...., who does not sing the Gathas, who spreads death in
the world and withstands the law of Mazda, the law of Zarathushtra.

52. 'If a murderer take of those offerings, or a whore, or a ....,
who does not sing the Gathas, then Verethraghna, made by Ahura,
takes back his healing virtues.

53. 'Plagues will ever pour upon the Aryan nations; hostile hordes
will ever fall upon the Aryan nations; the Aryans will be smitten
by their fifties and their hundreds, by their hundreds and their
thousands, by their thousands and their tens of thousands, by
their tens of thousands and their myriads of myriads.'

54. There Verethraghna, made by Ahura, proclaimed thus: 'The Soul
of the Bull,
the wise creature, does not receive from man due
sacrifice and prayer; for now the Daevas and the worshippers of
the Daevas make blood flow and spill it like water;

55. 'For now the Vyambura
Daevas and the worshippers of the Daevas
bring to the fire the plant that is called Haperesi, the wood
that is called Nemetka;

56. '(Therefore) when the Vyambura Daevas and the worshippers
of the Daevas bow their backs, bend their waists, and arrange
all their limbs,
they think they will smite and smite not, they
think they will kill and kill not; and then the (?Vyambura) Daevas
and the worshippers of the Daevas have their minds confounded
and their eyes made giddy.'

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

42. Against truth.

43. Cf. Yt. 10.108 seq.

44. § 48; cf. Yt. 8.56.

45. §§ 49-53 = Yt. 8.57-61.

46. Goshorun or Drvaspa; see Yt. 9. The destruction of any living
being is an injury to Drvaspa.

47. ? Vyâmbura.

48. The Haperesi and the Nemetka are probably some species of green
wood; it is forbidden to put green wood in the fire as it
kills it, and injures the Genius of Water at the same time.

49. In order to strike.

50. The general meaning of the last four clauses is that the
impious are defeated.

XVIII.

57. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

I offer up Haoma, who saves one's head;

I offer up the victorious Haoma; I offer him up, the good
protector; I offer up Haoma, who is a protector to my
body, as a man who shall drink of him shall
win and prevail
over his enemies in battle;

58. That I may smite this army, that I may smite down this army,
that I may cut in pieces this army that is coming behind me.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

51. ? Sâiri-baoghem; cf. § 46.

52. Nivazaiti; literally, swallow (? frôt ô bun burtan, Vd. 5.8 [26]).

XIX.

59. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

The prince and his son and his sons who are chiefs of myriads

offer him up a bright ...
[saying]: 'He is strong, and Victorious
is his name; he is victorious, and Strong is his name;'

60. That I may be as constantly victorious as any one of all the
Aryans;
that I may smite this army, that I may smite down this
army, that I may cut in pieces this army that is coming behind
me.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

53. Cf. Yt. 5.85.

54. ? Asânem sighûirê.

55. Cf. Yt. 5.69.

XX.

61. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

In the ox is our strength, in the ox is our need;

in the ox is
our speech, in the ox is our victory; in the ox is our food, in
the ox is our clothing; in the ox is tillage, that makes food
grow for us.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

56. From Y. 10.20 (62), where, instead of the words, 'in the ox
is our strength (amem), in the ox is our need,' the text has, 'in the
ox is his need, in the ox is our need,' meaning, 'when we give
him his need (water and grass), he gives us our need (milk and
calves),' (Pahl. tr.).

XXI.

62. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura;

Who breaks the columns asunder, who cuts the columns to pieces,
who wounds the columns, who makes the columns shake; who comes
and breaks the columns asunder, who comes and cuts the columns
to pieces, who comes and wounds the columns, who comes and makes
the columns shake, both of Daevas and men, of the Yatus and Pairikas,
of the oppressors, the blind, and the deaf.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

XXII.

63. We sacrifice to Verethraghna, made by Ahura.

When Verethraghna, made by Ahura, binds the hands, confounds the
eye-sight, takes the hearing from the ears of the Mithradrujes

marching in columns, allied by cities, they can no longer move
their feet, they can no longer-withstand.

For his brightness and glory I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

64. Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of Verethraghna, made by Mazda; and of the crushing Ascendant.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man
brightness and glory, .... give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

57. See p. 120, note 2.

58. Who shall offer a sacrifice to Verethraghna.

yt14sbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 15
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt15sbe.htm
================================================================================

yt15sbe

Translit.

Glossary

15. RAM YASHT

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas, and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani]
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto Rama Hvastra, unto Vayu who works highly and is more powerful
to afflict than all other creatures,

Be propitiation from me, for sacrifice, prayer, propitiation and
glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I

1.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them.
I will sacrifice to Peace, whose breath is friendly, and to Weal,
both of them.

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke, for this
house, for the master of this house, and for the man here who
is offering libations and giving gifts. To this excellent God
do we sacrifice, that he may accept our meat and our prayers,
and grant us in return to crush our enemies at one stroke.

2.

To him did the Maker, Ahura Mazda, offer up a sacrifice in
the Airyana Vaejah, on a golden throne, under golden beams and
a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma and offerings of full-boiling
[milk].

3.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that I may smite the creation of Angra Mainyu,
and that nobody may smite this creation of the Good Spirit!'

4.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

5.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu: we sacrifice to Vayu, who works
highly.

To this part of thee do we sacrifice, O Vayu! that belongs to
Spenta Mainyu.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the awful Vayu, who works highly.
We offer up a sacrifice unto the awful Vayu, who works highly,
with the libations, with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma,
with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, the words,
the deeds, the libations, and the well-spoken words.

Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

II

6.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

7.

To him did Haoshyangha, the Paradhata, offer up a sacrifice
on the Taera of the Hara, bound with iron, on a goIden throne,
under golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma
and offerings of full-boiling [milk].

8.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me, O Vayu! who dost
work highly, that I may smite two-thirds of the Daevas of Mazana
and of the fiends of Varena.'

9.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

III

10.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

11.

To him did Takhma Urupa, the well-armed, offer up a sacrifice
on a golden throne, under golden beams and a golden canopy, with
bundles of baresma and offerings of full-boiling [milk].

12.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that I may conquer all Daevas and men, all the
Yatus and Pairikas, and that I may ride Angra Mainyu, turned into
the shape of a horse, all around the earth from one end to the
other, for thirty years.'

13.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

'We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

IV

14.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them.....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

15.

Unto him did the bright Yima, the good shepherd, sacrifice
from the height Hukairya, the all-shining and golden, on a golden
throne, under golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of
baresma and offerings of full-boiling [milk].

16.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that I may become the most glorious of the men
born to behold the sun: that I may make in my reign both animals
and men undying, waters and plants undrying, and the food for
eating creatures never-failing.'

In the reign of the valiant Yima there was neither cold wind nor
hot wind, neither old age nor death, nor envy made by the Daevas.

17.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

V

18.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

19.

Unto him did the three-mouthed Azhi Dahaka offer up a sacrifice
in his accursed palace of Kvirinta, on a golden throne, under
golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma and
offerings of full-boiling [milk].

20.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that I may make all the seven Karshvares of
the earth empty of men.'

21.

In vain did he sacrifice, in vain did he beg, in vain did
he invoke, in vain did he give gifts, in vain did he bring libations;
Vayu did not grant him that boon.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

VI

22.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

23.

Unto him did Thraetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya clan,
offer up a sacrifice in the four-cornered Varena, on a golden
throne, under golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of
baresma and offerings of full-boiling [milk].

24.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that I may overcome Azhi Dahaka, the three-mouthed,
the three-headed, the six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that
most powerful, fiendish Druj, that demon baleful to the world,
the strongest Druj that Angra Mainyu created against the material
world, to destroy the world of the good principle; and that I
may deliver his two wives, Savanghavach and Erena-vach, who are
the fairest of body amongst women, and the most wonderful creatures
in the world.'

25.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

VII

26.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

27.

To him did the manly-hearted Keresaspa offer up a sacrifice
by the Gudha, a channel of the Rangha, made by Mazda, upon a golden
throne, under golden beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of
baresma and offerings of full-boiling [milk].

28.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that I may succeed in avenging my brother Urvakhshaya,
that I may smite Hitaspa and yoke him to my chariot.'

The Gandarewa, who lives beneath the waters, is the son of Ahura
in the deep, he is the only master of the deep.

29.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

VIII

30.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

31.

To him did Aurvasara, the lord of the country, offer up a
sacrifice, towards the White Forest, by the White Forest, on the
border of the White Forest, on a golden throne, under golden beams
and a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma and offerings of
full-boiling [milk].

32.

He begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu! who
dost work highly, that the gallant Husravah, he who unites the
Aryan nations into one kingdom, may not smite us; that I may flee
from king Husravah;....

'That king Husravah and all the Aryans in the forest may smite
him.'

33.

Vayu, who works highly, granted him that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice

Worth being heard....

IX

34.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

35.

To him did Hutaosa, she of the many brothers, of the Naotara
house, offer up a sacrifice, on a golden throne, under golden
beams and a golden canopy, with bundles of baresma and offerings
of boiling milk.

36.

She begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O Vayu!
who dost work highly, that I may be dear and loved and well-received
in the house of King Vishtaspa.'

37.

Vayu, who works highly, granted her that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

38.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

39.

To him did the maids, whom no man had known, offer up a sacrifice
on a golden throne, under golden beams and a golden canopy, with
bundles of baresma and offerings of boiling milk.

40.

They begged of him a boon, saying: 'Grant us this, O Vayu!
who dost work highly, that we may find a husband, young and beautifuI
of body, who will treat us well, all life long, and give us offspring;
a wise, learned, ready-tongued husband.'

41.

Vayu, who works highly, granted them that boon, as the Maker,
Ahura Mazda, did pursue it.

We sacrifice to the holy Vayu....

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard....

42.

I will sacrifice to the Waters and to Him who divides them....

To this Vayu do we sacrifice, this Vayu do we invoke....

We sacrifice to that Vayu that belongs to the Good Spirit, the
bright and glorious Vayu.

43.

My name is Vayu, O holy Zarathushtra! My name is Vayu, because
I go through (vyemi) the two worlds, the one which the Good Spirit
has made and the one which the Evil Spirit has made.

My name is the Overtaker (apaeta), O holy Zarathushtra! My name
is the Overtaker, because I can overtake the creatures of both
worlds, the one that the Good Spirit has made and the one that
the Evil Spirit has made.

44.

My name is the All-smiting, O holy Zarathushtra! My name is
the All-smiting, because I can smite the creatures of both worlds,
the one that the Good Spirit has made and the one that the Evil
Spirit has made.

My name is the Worker of Good, O holy Zarathushtra! My name is
the Worker of Good, because I work the good of the Maker, Ahura
Mazda and of the Amesha-Spentas.

45.

My name is He that goes forwards.

My name is He that goes backwards.

My name is He that bends backwards.

My name is He that hurls away.

My name is He that hurls down.

My name is He that destroys.

My name is He that takes away.

My name is He that finds out.

My name is He that finds out the Glory (Hvareno).

46.

My name is the Valiant; my name is the Most Valiant.

My name is the Strong; my name is the Strongest.

My name is the Firm; my name is the Firmest.

My name is the Stout; my name is the Stoutest.

My name is He that crosses over easily.

My name is He that goes along hurling away.

My name is He that crushes at one stroke.

My name is (?Ainiva).

My name is He that works against the Daevas.

My name is (?Keredharisha).

47.

My name is He that prevails over malice; my name is He that
destroys malice.

My name is He that unites; my name is He that reunites; my name
is He that separates.

My name is the Burning; my name is the Quick of intelligence,

My name is Deliverance; my name is Welfare.

My name is the Burrow; my name is He who destroys the burrows;
my name is He who spits upon the burrows.

48.

My name is Sharpness of spear; my name is He of the sharp
spear.

My name is Length of spear; my name is He of the long spear.

My name is Piercingness of spear; my name is He of the piercing
spear.

My name is the Glorious; my name is the Over-glorious.

49.

Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zarathushtra! in the midst
of the havocking hordes, in the midst of the columns moving forwards,
in the strife of the conflicting nations.

50.

Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zarathushtra! when the
all-powerful tyrant of a country falls upon thee, rushes upon
thee, deals wounds hpon thee, or hurls his chariot against thee,
to rob thee of thy wealth, to rob thee of thy health.

51.

Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zarathushtra! when the
unholy Ashemaogha falls upon thee, rushes upon thee, deals wounds
upon thee, or hurls his chariot against thee, to rob thee of thy
strength, to rob thee of thy health, to rob thee of thy health.

52.

Invoke these names of mine, O holy Zarathushtra! when a man
stands in bonds, when a man is being thrown into bonds, or when
a man is being dragged in bonds: thus the prisoners flee from
the hands of those who carry them, they flee away out of the prison.

53.

O thou Vayu! who strikest fear upon all men and horses, who
in all creatures workest against the Daevas, both into the lowest
places and into those a thousand times deep dost thou enter with
equal power.

54.

'With what manner of sacrifice shall I worship thee? With
what manner of sacrifice shall I forward and worship thee? With
what manner of sacrifice will be achieved thy adoration, O great
Vayu! thou who art high-up g.rded, firm, swift-moving, high-footed,
wide-breasted, wide-thighed, with untrembling eyes, as powerful
in sovereignty as any absolute sovereign in the world?'

55.

'Take thou a baresma, O holy Zarathushtra! turn it upwards
or downwards, according as it is full day or dawning; upwards
during the day, downwards at the dawn.

56.

'If thou makest me worshipped with a sacrifice, then I shall
say unto thee with my own voice things of health, made by Mazda
and full of glory, so that Angra Mainyu may never do harm unto
thee, nor the Yatus, nor those addicted to the works of the Yatu,
whether Daevas or men.'

57.

We sacrifice unto thee, O great Vayu! we sacrifice unto thee,
O strong Vayu!

We sacrifice unto Vayu, the greatest of the great; we sacrifice
unto Vayu, the strongest of the strong.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden helm.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden crown.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden necklace.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden chariot.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden wheel.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden weapons.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden garment.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden shoe.

We sacrifice unto Vayu, of the golden girdle.

We sacrifice unto the holy Vayu; we sacrifice unto Vayu, who works
highly.

To this part of thee do we sacrifice, O Vayu! that belongs to
the Good Spirit.

For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the awful Vayu, who works highly....

58.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and invocation unto, and the strength and
vigour of Rama Hvastra, and Vayu, who works highly, more powerful
to amict than all the other creatures: this part of thee that
belongs to the Good Spirit.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

16. DEN YASHT

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

To the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy, and to the good
Law of the worshippers of Mazda.

Be propitiation from me, for sacrifice, prayer, propitiation,
and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness.....

[[1]]

1.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda, the
supplier of good stores, who runs quickly to the goal and frees
one best from dangers, who brings libations, who is holy, clever,
and renowned, speedy to work and quick of work; who goes quickly
and cleanses well; the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda;

2.

To whom Zarathushtra did sacrifice, saying: 'Rise up from
thy seat, come forward from the Abode, thou most right Chista,
made by Mazda and holy. If thou art before me, stay for me; if
thou art behind me, overtake me.

3.

'Let everything be as friendly to us as anything can be: may
we go smoothly along the roads, find good pathways in the mountains,
run easily through the forests, and cross happily the rivers!'

4.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the most right Chista, made by
Mazda and holy. I will offer up a sacrifice unto the most right
Chista, made by Mazda and holy, with the libations, with the Haoma
and meat, with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with
the holy spells, with the words and deeds, with the libations,
with the well spoken words.

Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

[[2]]

5.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda.... (repeat
verse 1).

6.

To whom Zarathushtra did sacrifice for righteousness of thought,
for righteousness of speech, for righteousness of deed, and for
this boon,

7.

That the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy, would
give him the swiftness of the feet, the quick hearing of the ears,
the strength of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the Kara fish, that lives
beneath the waters, and can measure a rippling of the waters not
thicker than a hair, in the Rangha, whose ends lie afar and whose
depth is a thousand times the height of a man.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard....

[[3]]

8.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda....

9.

To whom Zarathushtra did sacrifice for righteousness of thought,
for righteousness of speech, for righteousness of deed, and for
this boon,

10.

That the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy, would
give him the swiftness of the feet, the quick hearing of the ears,
the strength of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the male horse, that,
in the dark of the night, through the rain, the snow, the hail,
or the sleet, from as far as nine districts, can perceive a horse's
hair, mingled with the earth, and knows whether it is from the
head or from the tail.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard....

[[4]]

11.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda....

12.

To whom Zarathushtra did sacrifice for righteousness of thought,
for righteousness of speech, for righteousness of deed, and for
this boon,

13.

That the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy, would
give him the swiftness of the feet, the quick hearing of the ears,
the strength of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness
of the whole body, and the eye-sight of the vulture with a golden
collar, that, from as far as nine districts, can perceive a piece
of flesh, not thicker than a fist, giving just as much light as
a needle gives, as the point of a needle gives.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard....

[[5]]

14.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda....

15.

To whom the holy Hvovi did sacrifice with full knowledge,
wishing that the holy Zarathushtra would give her his good narcotic,
that she might think according to the law, speak according to
the law, and do according to the law.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard....

[[6]]

16.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda....

17.

To whom the Athravans, sent afar, did sacrifice, wishing a
good memory to preach the law, and wishing strength for their
own body.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard....

[[7]]

18.

We sacrifice to the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy:
we sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda....

19.

To whom the king of the country, the lord of the country does
sacrifice, wishing peace for his country, wishing strength for
his own body.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard....

20.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the most right Chista, made by Mazda and holy, and of the good
Law of the worshippers of Mazda.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him long,
long life, give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.

Avesta: Khorda Avesta

17. ASHI YASHT ("Hymn to Ashi")

This digital edition copyright © 1995
by Joseph H. Peterson. All rights reserved.

English translation by James Darmesteter (From
Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

Avestan text based on edition of Karl F. Geldner,
Avesta, the Sacred
Books of the Parsis,
Stuttgart, 1896.

This hymn is also known as the "Ard Yasht."

"Ashi Vanghuhi or 'the good Ashi
' is a feminine impersonation
of piety
, and she is, at the same time, the source of all the good
and riches that are connected with piety
. She is described, therefore,
as a goddess of Fortune and Wealth, and is invoked in company
with Parendi, the goddess of Treasures (
Sirozah 25
).

She appears in the latter character in the first part of the Yasht
(
§§ 1-14
); she praises and loves Zarathushtra
(
§§ 15-21
). She is worshipped by Haoshyangha
(
§ 26
), Yima (§ 28), Thraetaona [Faridoon] (§ 33),
Haoma (§ 37), Husravah (§ 41), Zarathushtra (§ 45), and Vishtaspa
(§ 49)
. She rejects the offerings of all sterile people (old men,
courtezans, and children, §§ 53-61).

Notes:

1. In Parsi
Ardishvang
or
Ard
(
Ardish
from
Artish
, the Persian
form of
Ashish
); she presides over the 25th day of the month; cf.

Sirozah 25.

2. Ashi is not the feminine adjective of Asha, as the
i
was
originally short (genitive
ashôish
, not
ashyau
); ashi is ar-ti, and
means
bhakti
, piety (Neriosengh).

3. The so-called Ashi's remedies (
ashôish baêshaza
; cf.

Yt13.32
.)

4. This enumeration is the same as in the
Gosh Yasht

(§§ 3, 8, 14, 17, 21, 26, 29).

I.

0. (pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
i awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât,

mainyô arshasañg bê rasât,

ezh hamâ gunâh ... pa patit hôm!)

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomî ashem,

ashem vohû...(3).

fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô,

(Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.)

ashôish vanghuyå cistôish vanghuyå erethê
vanghuyå rasãstâtô vanghuyå hvarenanghô
savanghô mazdadhâtahe

xshnaothra ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca,

ýathâ ahû vairyô zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê,

athâ ratush ashâtcît haca frâ ashava vîdhvå
mraotû!

1. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm,

1. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining,
high, tall-formed, well worthy of sacrifice, with a
loud-sounding chariot, strong, welfare-giving, healing,
with fulness of intellect
, and powerful;

5.
Perethu-vîra
; see Études Iraniennes, II, 183.

2. dukhdharem ahurahe mazdå hvangharem ameshanãm
speñtanãm ýâ vîspanãm
saoshyañtãm frasha xrathwa frathañjayeiti
uta-hê âsnem xratûm ava-baraiti vârema
uta-hê âsnaêca zbayañtâi dûraêca
zbayañtâi jasaiti avanghe, ýô ashîm
ýazâite zaothrâbyô hô mithrem ýazâite
zaothrâbyô.

2. The daughter of Ahura Mazda, the sister of
the Amesha-Spentas, who endows all the Saoshyants

with the enlivening intelligence; she also
brings heavenly wisdom at her wish, and comes to
help him who invokes her from near and him who
invokes her from afar, and worships her with offerings
of libations.

6. The allies of Saoshyant, who are to be active in the restoration
of the world to eternal life (frashegird). Cf.
Yt11.17, note 1
.
Ashi gives them the 'intelligence of life' (
frasha khratu
), through
which they will be enabled to perform their task.

3. ahe raya hvarenanghaca

tãm ýazâi surunvata ýasna

tãm ýazâi huyashta ýasna

ashîm vanguhîm zaothrâbyô, ashîm
vanguhîm ýazamaide

haomayô gava baresmana hizvô danghangha mãthraca
vacaca shyaothnaca zaothrâbyasca arshuxdhaêibyasca
vâkhzhibyô.

ýenghê hâtãm âat ýesnê
paitî vanghô mazdå ahurô vaêthâ
ashât hacâ ýånghãmcâ tãscâ
tåscâ ýazamaide!

. For her brightness and glory, I will offer her
a sacrifice worth being heard; I will offer up unto
Ashi Vanguhi a good sacrifice with an offering of
libations. We sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi with
the libations, with the Haoma and meat, with the
baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the
holy spells, with the words, with the deeds, with
the libations, and with the rightly-spoken words.

Yenhe-hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

7. Cf.
Yt5.10.

II.

4. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

4. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed,
well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong,
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect, and powerful.

5. haomaheca nemô mãthraheca ashaonaêca zarathushtrahe,

atcit bâ nemô haomâi

ýat vîspe anye madhånghô

aêshma haciñte xrvidrvô

âat hô ýô haomahe madhô

asha hacaite hvaê-paithe.

5. Homage unto Haoma, and unto the Mathra
,
and unto the holy Zarathushtra!

Homage unto Haoma, because all other drinks
are attended with Aeshma
, the fiend of the wounding
spear: but the drinking of Haoma is attended
with Asha and with Ashi Vanguhi herself
.

8. The Holy Word.

9. The Daeva of anger.

10. As drinking of Haoma is an act of religion (cf.

Yasna 11, 12 seq.
)

6. ashish vanguhi ashi srîre ashi bânumaiti shâiti
vyâvaiti bânubyô

ashi dâthre vohûm hvarenô

aêshãm narãm ýôi hacahi,

hubaoidhish baodhaite nmânem

ýenghe nmâne ashish vanguhi

sûra pâdha nidathaite

âgremaitish darekhâi haxedhrâi.

6. Ashi is fair; Ashi is radiant with joy; she is
far-piercing with her rays. Ashi gives good Glory

unto those men whom thou dost follow, O Ashi!
Full of perfumes is the house in which the good,
powerful Ashi Vanguhi puts her ....
feet, for long
friendship.

11. ? Âgairimaitish.

7. tê narô xshathra xshayeñte ash-baourva

nidhâtô-pitu hubaoidhi

ýahmya staretasca gâtush

anyåsca berexdhå avaretå

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi,

ushta bâ ýim hacahi

uta mãm upanghacahi

vouru-saredha amavaiti.

7. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi!
are kings of kingdoms, that are rich in horses, with
large tributes, with snorting horses, sounding chariots,
flashing swords, rich in aliments and in stores of
food
; well-scented where the beds are spread and
full of all the other riches that may be wished for.
Happy the man whom thou dost attend! do thou
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things
and strong!

12. Cf.
Yt5.130
.

8. aêshãm nmânå hvidhâtå

gaosûrånghô hishteñte

ash-paourvå darekhô-upastêe

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi,

ushta bâ ýim hacahi

uta mãm upanghacahi

vouru-saredha amavaiti.

8. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have houses that stand well laid up, rich in
cattle, foremost in Asha, and long-supported. Happy
the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou attend
me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and
strong!

9. aêshãm gâtava hishteñte

hustareta hupô-busta

hukereta barezish-havañtô

zaranyapaxshta-pâdhånghô

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

9. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have beds that stand well-spread, well-adorned,
well-made, provided with cushions and with feet
inlaid with gold. Happy the man whom thou dost
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts
of desirable things and strong!

10. aêshãm vañtånghô bât
mainyånghô

gâtush paiti ångheñti

ýôi srîra barezish-havañtô

merezyumnå añku-paêsemnå

frâ gaoshâvara sispimna

cathru-karana minuca zaranyô-pisi. kadha nô avi âjasât
nmânô-paitish kadha shâiti paitishâm fryâ
paiti tanvi

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

10. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have their ladies that sit on their beds,
waiting for them: they lie on the cushions, adorning
themselves, ....
, with square bored ear-rings and
a necklace of gold: 'When will our lord come?
when shall we enjoy in our bodies the joys of love?'

Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things
and strong!

13. ? Ankupasmanau.

11. aêshãm kaininô ångheñte

ãkhmô-paidhish urvizô-maidhyå

sraotanvô darekhô-añgushtå

kehrpa avavatãm sraya

ýatha didhayatãm zaoshô

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

11. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have daughters that sit ....
; thin is
their waist, beautiful is their body, long are their
fingers; they are as fair of shape as those who look
on can wish. Happy the man whom thou dost
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts
of desirable things and strong!

14. ? Âgamô-paidhisha.

12. aêshãm aspånghô bayeñte

âsavô ravô-fraothemanô

raom vâshem vâshayañte

mrâtem carema thañjayeñte

taxmem staotârem vazeñti

âsu-aspem derezi-rathem

tizhi-arshtîm darekha-âreshtaêm

xshviwi-ishûm parô-kevîdhem

vîtârem paskât hamerethem

jañtârem parô dushmainyûm

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

12. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have horses swift and loud-neighing;
they drive the chariot lightly, they take it to the
battle
, they bear a gallant praiser (of the gods),
who has many horses, a solid chariot, a sharp spear,
a long spear, and swift arrows, who hits his aim,
pursuing after his enemies, and smiting his foes.
Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things
and strong!

15. Doubtful.

13. aêshãm ushtrånghô bayeñte

saêni-kaofa ash-manangha aojayeni zemat peretamna vadhairyavô

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

13. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have large-humped, burden-bearing camels,
flying from the ground or fighting with holy fieriness
.
Happy the man whom thou dost attend!
Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable
things and strong!

16. Cf.
Yt14.11.

14. aêshãm erezatem zaranim

niberethi âbereta baraiti

aiwitarâbyô haca danghubyô

vastråsca keshå bâmanivå

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi,

ushta bâ ýim hacahi

uta mãm upanghacahi

vouru-saredha amavaiti.

14. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi!
have hoards of silver and gold brought
together from far distant regions; and garments of
splendid make. Happy the man whom thou dost
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts
of desirable things and strong!

15. apa mãm apa-daidhya

frâ-mãm aiwi-urvaêsayanguha

marzhdikem ashish berezaiti,

hudhâta ahi hucithra

vasatha ahi xshayamna

tanuye hvarenanghe dâite.

15. Do not turn thy look from me! turn thy
mercy towards me, O great Ashi! thou art well-made
and of a noble seed
; thou art sovereign at
thy wish; thou art Glory in a bodily form.

17. Born from the gods; cf.
Hadhokht Nask, Part II, § 9.

16. pita-tê ýô ahurô mazdå

ýô mazishtô ýazatanãm

ýô vahishtô ýazatanãm,

mâta ârmaitish speñta

brâta tê ýô vanghush sraoshô ashyô

rashnushca berezô amavå

mithrasca vouru-gaoyaoitish ýô baêvare-spasanô
hazangra-gaoshô hvangha daêna mâzdayesnish.

16. Thy father is Ahura Mazda, the greatest of
all gods, the best of all gods; thy mother is Armaiti Spenta;
thy brothers are Sraosha
, a god of Asha,
and Rashnu
, tall and strong, and Mithra
, the lord
of wide pastures, who has ten thousand spies and
a thousand ears; thy sister is the Law [Daena]
of the worshippers
of Mazda.

18. See
Yt11.

19. See
Yt12.

20. See
Yt10.

21. [See
Yt16.
]

17. upa-staota ýazatanãm

amuyamna razishtanãm

paiti-stayata raithya

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

uiti vacêbish aojana,

kô ahi ýô mãm zbayehi

ýenghe azem frâyô zbayeñtãm

sraêshtem susruye vâcim.

17. Praised of the gods, unoffended by the righteous
,
the great Ashi Vanguhi stood up on her
chariot, thus speaking: 'Who art thou who dost
invoke me, whose voice is to my ear the sweetest
of all that invoked me most?'

22. Or, 'doing no harm to the righteous.'

18. adhât uiti fravashata,

ýô spitâmô zarathushtrô

ýô paoiryô mashyâkô

staota ashem ýat vahishtem

ýazata ahurem mazdãm

ýazata ameshê speñtê

ýenghe zãthaêca vaxshaêca

urvâsen âpô urvaråsca

ýenghe zãthaêca vaxshaêca

uxshin âpô urvaråsca,

18. And he said aloud: 'I am Spitama Zarathushtra,
who, first of mortals, recited the praise of
the excellent Asha
and offered up sacrifice unto
Ahura Mazda and the Amesha-Spentas; in whose
birth and growth the waters and the plants rejoiced;
in whose birth and growth the waters and the plants
grew; in whose birth and growth all the creatures
of the good creation cried out, Hail
!

23. The
Ahunwar.

24. Cf.
Yt13.93.

19. ýehe zãthaêca vaxshaêca

apa-dvarat angrô mainyush

haca zemat ýat pathanayå

skarenayå dûraêpârayå,

uiti davata hô ýô duzhdå

angrô mainyush pouru-mahrkô,

nôit mãm vîspe ýazatånghô

anuseñtem fraoreciñta

âat mãm aêvô zarathushtrô

anuseñtem apayeiti,

19. 'In whose birth and growth Angra Mainyu
rushed away from this wide, round earth, whose
ends lie afar, and he, the evil-doing Angra Mainyu,
who is all death, said: "All the gods together

have not been able to smite me down in spite
of myself, and Zarathushtra alone can reach me in
spite of myself.

20. jaiñti mãm ahuna vairya avavata snaithisha ýatha
asma katô-maså, tâpayeiti mãm asha vahishta
mãnayen ahe ýatha ayaoxshustem, raêkô
mê haca anghå zemat vanghô kerenaoiti

ýô mãm aêvô jâmayeiti

ýô spitâmô zarathushtrô.

20. '"He smites me with the Ahuna Vairya, as
strong a weapon as a stone big as a house
; he
burns me with Asha-Vahishta, as if it were melting
brass
. He makes it better for me that I should
leave this earth, he, Spitama Zarathushtra, the only
one who can daunt me."'

25. Cf.
Vd19.4.

26. Cf.
Yt3.

21. adhât uiti fravashata

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti,

nazdyô mãm upa-hishta

erezvô ashâum spitama

upa mê srayanguha vâshahe,

nazdyô tãm upa-hishtat

ýô spitâmô zarathushtrô

upa hê srayata vâshahe.

21. And the great Ashi Vanguhi exclaimed: 'Come nearer unto me,
thou pure, holy Spitama! lean against my chariot!'

Spitama Zarathushtra came nearer unto her, he leant against her
chariot.

22. â-dim usca pairi-marezat

hâvôya bâzvô dashinaca

dashina bâzvô hâvayaca

uiti vacêbish aojana,

srîrô ahi zarathushtra

hukeretô ahi spitama

hvascvô darekhô-bâzâush

dâtem tê tanuye hvarenô

urunaêca darekhem havanghem

ýatha imat ýat tê frâvaocim.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

22. And she caressed him with the left arm and the right, with
the right arm and the left, thus speaking: 'Thou art beautiful,
O Zarathushtra! thou art well-shapen, O Spitama! strong are thy
legs and long are thy arms: Glory is given to thy body and long
cheerfulness
to thy soul, as sure as I proclaim it unto thee.'

27. Bliss after death.

III.

23. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

23. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed,
well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong,
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect and powerful.

24. tãm ýazata

haoshyanghô paradhâtô

upa upabdi harayå berezô

srîrayå mazdadhâtayå.

. To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradhata, offer up a sacrifice,
upon the enclosure of the Hara, the beautiful height, made by
Mazda.


25. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýat bavâni aiwi-vanyå

vîspe daêva mâzanya,

ýatha azem nôit tarshtô frânmâne

thwaêshât parô daêvaêibyô

frâ ahmât parô vîspe daêva

anusô tarshta nemåñte

tarshta temanghô dvaråñti.

25. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant
me this, O great Ashi Vanguhi! that I may overcome all the Daevas of Mazana; that I
may never fear and bow through terror before the Daevas, but that
all the Daevas may fear and bow in spite of themselves before
me, that they may fear and flee down to darkness.'

26. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, vîñdât
tem ýânem haoshyanghô paradhâtô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

26. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: Haoshyangha,
the Paradhata, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

IV.

27. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

27. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

28. tãm ýazata

ýô ýimô xshaêtô hvãthwô

hukairyât haca barezanghat.

. To her did Yima Khshaeta, the good shepherd, offer up a sacrifice
from the height Hukairya.


29. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýatha azem fshaoni vãthwa ava-barâni avi mazdå
dâmabyô ýatha azem amerextîm avi-barâni
avi mazdå dâmabyô,

29. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bring fatness and flocks down to the world
created by Mazda; that I may bring immortality down to the world
created by Mazda;

30. uta azem apa-barâni va shudhemca tarshnemca haca mazdå
dâmabyô uta azem apa-barâni va zaourvãmca
merethyûmca haca mazdå dâmabyô uta azem
apa-barâni va garememca vâtem aotemca haca mazdå
dâmabyô hazangrem aiwi-gâmanãm.

30. 'That I may take away both hunger and thirst, from the world
created by Mazda; that I may take away both old age and death,
from the world created by Mazda; that I may take away both hot
wind and cold wind, from the world created by Mazda, for a thousand
years.'

31. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem ýô ýimô xshaêtô
hvãthwô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

31. Then great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: Yima Khshaeta,
the good shepherd, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice ....

V.

32. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

32. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

33. tãm ýazata

vîsô puthrô âthwyânôish

vîsô sûrayå thraêtaonô

upa varenem cathru-gaoshem.

. To her did Thraetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya clan,
offer up a sacrifice in the four-cornered Varena.

31. Cf.
Yt5.34
;
Yt9.14
;

Yt15.24
.

34. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýat bavâni aiwi-vanyå azhîm dahâkem
thrizafanem thrikameredhem xshvash-ashîm hazangrâ-ýaoxshtîm
ashaojanghem daêvîm drujem akhem gaêthâvyô
drvañtem ýãm ashaojastemãm drujem
fraca kereñtat angrô mainyush aoi ýãm
astvaitîm gaêthãm mahrkâi ashahe gaêthanãm,
uta-hê vañta azâni sanghavâci arenavâci
ýôi hen kehrpa sraêshta zazâtêe
gaêthyâi tê ýôi abdôteme.

34. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may overcome Azhi Dahaka, the three-mouthed, the
three-headed, the six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that most
powerful, fiendish Druj, that demon, baleful to the world, the
strongest Druj that Angra Mainyu created against the material
world, to destroy the world of the good principle; and that I
may deliver his two wives, Savanghavak and Erenavak, who are the
fairest of body amongst women, and the most wonderful creatures
in the world.'

35. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem vîsô puthrô athwyânôish
vîsô sûrayå thraêtaonô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

35.
The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. Thraetaona,
the heir of the valiant Athwya clan, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice ....

VI.

36. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

36. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

37. tãm ýazata

haomô frâshmish baêshazyô

srîrô xshathryô zairi-dôithrô

barezishte paiti barezahi

haraithyô paiti barezayå.

. To her did Haoma offer up a sacrifice, Haoma, the enlivening,
the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes, upon
the highest height of the Haraiti Bareza.


38. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýatha azem bañdayeni mairîm tûirîm
frangrasyânem uta bastem vâdhayeni uta bastem upanayeni
bastem kavôish haosravanghahe janât tem kava haosrava
pasne varôish caêcastahe jafrahe uruyâpahe puthrô
kaêna syâvarshânâi zûrô-jatahe
narahe akhraêrathaheca naravahe.

38. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bind the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan,
that I may drag him bound, that I may bring him bound unto king
Husravah, that king Husravah may kill him, behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder of his
father Syavarshana, a man, and of Aghraeratha, a semi-man.'

39. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem haomô frâshmish baêshazyô
srîrô xshathryô zairi-dôithrô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

39. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. Haoma, the
enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden
eyes, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

VII.

40. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

40. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

41. tãm ýazata

arsha airyanãm dah'yunãm

xshathrâi hañkeremô haosrava.

. To her did the gallant Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations
into one kingdom, offer up a sacrifice, behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake of salt waters.


42. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýatha azem nijanâni mairîm tûirîm
frangrasyânem pasne varôish caêcastahe jafrahe
urvyâpahe puthrô kaêna syâvarshânâi
zûrô-jatahe narahe akhraêrathaheca naravahe.

42.
He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may kill the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan,
behind the Chaechasta lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge
the murder of my father Syavarshana, a man, and of Aghraeratha,
a semi-man.'

43. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem arsha airyanãm dah'yunãm
xshathrâi hañkeremô haosrava.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

43. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. The gallant
Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations into one kingdom, obtained
that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

VIII.

44. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

44. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

45. tãm ýazata ýô ashava zarathushtrô
airyene vaêjahi vanghuyå dâityayå.

45. To her did the holy Zarathushtra offer up a sacrifice in the
Airyana Vaejah, by the good river Daitya, with the Haoma and meat,
with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy
spells, with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations, and
with the rightly-spoken words.


46. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýatha azem hâcayene vanguhîm âzâtãm
hutaosãm anumatêe daênayâi anûxtêe
daênayâi anu-varshtêe daênayâi ýâ-mê
daênãm mâzdayasnîm zrasca dât apica
aotât ýâ-mê varezânâi vanguhîm
dât frasastîm.

46. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bring the good and noble Hutaosa to think
according to the law, to speak according to the law, to do according
to the law, that she may spread my law and make it known, that
she may bestow beautiful praises upon my deeds.'

47. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem ýô ashava zarathushtrô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

47. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: the holy
Zarathushtra obtained that boon.

For her brightness, and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

IX.

48. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

48.
We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

49. tãm ýazata

berezaidhish kava vîshtâspô

pasne âpô dâityayå.

49.
To her did the tall Kavi Vishtaspa offer up a sacrifice behind
the waters of the river Daitya.

50. âat hîm jaidhyat,

avat âyaptem dazdi-mê

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

ýatha azâni peshana ashta aurvañtô vîspa-thaurvô
ashtôish puthrô vîspa-thaurvô urvi-xaodhô
urvi-verethrô stvî-manaothrish ýenghe hapta
sata ushtranãm jainyâvarat pasca hvîdhahe,
ýatha azâni peshana mairyehe h'yaonahe arejat-aspahe,
ýatha azâni peshana darshinikahe daêvayasnahe.

50.
He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may put to flight Ashta-aurvant, the son of Vispo-thaurvo-asti,
the all-afflicting, of the brazen helmet, of the brazen armour,
of the thick neck, behind whom seven hundred

camels ....; that I may put to flight the
Hvyaona murderer, Arejat-aspa; that I may put to
flight Darshinika, the worshipper of the Daevas;

51. uta azem nijanâni tãthryâvañtem
duzhdaênem uta azem nijanâi spinjaurushem daêvayasnem,
uta azem fraourvaêsayeni humaya varedhakanãmca h'yaonya
haca dainghâvô, uta azem nijanâni h'yaonînãm
dah'yunãm pañcasakhnâi satakhnâishca
satakhnâi hazangrakhnâishca hazangrakhnâi baêvarekhnâishca
baêvarekhnâi ahãxshtakhnâishca.

51. 'And that I may smite Tathravant of the bad law; that I may
smite Spinjaurushka, the worshipper of the Daevas; and that I
may bring unto the good law the nations of the Varedhakas and
of the Hvyaonas; and that I may smite of the Hvyaona nations their
fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands,
their thousands and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands
and their myriads of myriads.'

52. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem berezaidhish kava vîshtâspô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

52. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: the tall
Kavi Vishtaspa obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard ....

X.

53. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

53. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

54. âat aoxta ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti,
mâ-cish mê ånghãm zaothranãm viñdita
ýâ mâvôya nipârayeiñti mâ
narô pairishtâ-xshudhrô mâ jahika para-daxshta
mâ aperenâyu tauruna mâ kainina anupaêta
mashyânãm.

54. And the great Ashi Vanguhi said: 'None of
those libations will be accepted by me, which are
sent to me either by a man whose seed is dried out
,
or by the courtezan who produces untimely issues
,
or by young boys, or by girls who have known no man
.

35. See
Vd3.20, note.

36. By procuring abortion.

37. She refuses the offerings of all barren beings.

55. ýat mãm tura pazdayañta

âsu-aspa naotaraca

âat azem tanûm aguze

adhairi pâdhem gêush arshnô baremâyaonahe

âat mãm fraguzayañta

ýôi aperenâyu tauruna

ýôi kainina anupaêta mashyânãm.

55. 'When the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras
, clapping their
hands, ran after me
,

I hid myself under the foot of a bull walking under his burden;
then young boys, and girls who had known no man, discovered me,
even while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras, clapping
their hands, were running after me.

38. Cf.
Yt5.98
. The following clauses allude to some myth of
Ashi Vanghuhi connected with the conflict between the Turanians
and the Naotaras (either Tusa and Vistauru; cf. p. 71, note 7, or
more likely Vishtaspa himself, to whom the preceding chapter
[§§ 48-52] and the last but one clause of the Yasht refer). She tried
to flee in the way practised by Ulysses in the Cyclops' cavern; both
parties were pursuing the animal that bore her, though they knew
not what it bore, till children discovered her.

39. Dar. has this phrase in § 54. -JHP

56. ýatcit mãm tura pazdayañta

âsu-aspa naotaraca

atcit azem tanûm aguze

adhairi maêshahe garô

ýat varshnôish satô-karahe

atcit mãm fraguzayañta

ýôi aperenâyu tauruna

ýôi kainina anupaêta mashyânãm

ýatcit mãm tura pazdayañta

âsu-aspaêm naotaraca.

56. 'Even I hid myself under the throat of a ram of hundredfold
energy: then again young boys, and girls who had known no man,
discovered me, even while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras,
clapping their hands, were running after me.'

57. paoiryãm gerezãm gerezaêta

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

haca aputhrô-zanyâi jahikayâi,

mâ hê avi pâdhem ava-hishta

mâ gâtûm nipaidhyanguha,

kutha hîsh azem kerenavâni

asmanem avi frashusâni

zãm avi ni-urvisyâni.

57. The first wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi is her wailing
about the courtezan who destroys her fruit: 'Stand thou not near
her, sit thou not on her bed!' — 'What shall I do? Shall I go
back to the heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

58. bityãm gerezãm gerezaêta

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti

haca avanghâi jahikayâi

ýâ aom puthrem baraiti

anyahmâi arshânâi varshtem

paithe upa-baraiti,

kutha hîsh azem kerenavâni

asmanem avi frashusâni

zãm avi ni-urvisyâni.

58. The second wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi
is her wailing about the courtezan who brings forth
a child conceived of a stranger and presents it to
her husband: 'What shall I do? Shall I go back
to the heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

59. thrityãm gerezãm gerezaêta

ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti,

imat mê stâvishtem shyaothnem

mashya vereziñti sâsta

ýat kainyô uzvâdhayeiñti

darekhem akhrvô nijâmayeiñti,

kutha hîsh azem kerenavâni

asmanem avi frashusâni

zãm avi ni-urvisyâni.

59. This is the third wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi: 'This
is the worst deed that men and tyrants do, namely, when they deprive
maids, that have been barren for a long time, of marrying and
bringing forth children. What shall I do? Shall I go back to the
heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

60. âat mraot ahurô mazdå,

ashi srîre dâmidhâite

mâ avi asmanem frashusa

mâ avi zãm ni-urvise

itha mê tûm hãm-caranguha

añtare aredhem nmânahe

srîrahe xshathrô-keretahe,

60. Ahura Mazda answered: 'O fair and wise
Ashi, go not back to the heavens, sink not into the

earth! Stay here and walk inside the fine kingly
palace.'

61. ana thwâ ýasna ýazâne

ana ýasna frâyazâne

ýase-thwâ ýazata vîshtâspô

pasne âpô dâityayå,

berezem barât zaota vâcim

hishtemnô pasca baresma,

ana thwâ ýasna ýazâne

ana ýasna frâyazâne

ashi srîre dâmidhâite

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

61. I shall worship thee with such a sacrifice, I
shall worship and forward thee with such a sacrifice
as Vishtaspa offered unto thee, behind the river Daitya
.
The Zaotar lifted up a loud voice, with
baresma before him. With that sort of sacrifice
shall I worship thee? With that sort of sacrifice
shall I worship and forward thee, O fair and wise
Ashi?

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

40. Cf. §§ 49 seq.

(Recite silently:)

62. (hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât,)

(Recite aloud:)

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2).

ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi

ashôish vanghuyå cistôish vanghuyå erethê
vanghuyå rasãstâtô vanghuyå hvarenanghô
savanghô mazdadhâtahe.

ashem vohû....

ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd) ... ashem vohû...!!

* *

*

62. Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength
and vigour of Ashi Vanguhi; of the good Chisti
; of the good Erethe; of the
good Rasastat; of the Glory and Weal, made by Mazda.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.

41. Cf.
Sirozah, § 25.

Yt17

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 18
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt18sbe.htm
================================================================================

18. ASHTAD YASHT

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra.
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness ....

Unto the Glory of the Aryans, made by Mazda,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1.

Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'I made
the Aryan Glory, rich in food, rich in flocks, rich in wealth,
rich in Glory; provided with full store of intelligence, with
full store of money, to withstand Need, and to withstand enemies.

2.

'It destroys Angra Mainyu, who is all death; it destroys Aeshma,
the fiend of the wounding spear; it destroys the yellow Bushyasta;
it destroys the contagion of Aekha; it destroys the fiend of death,
Apaosha; it destroys the non-Aryan nations.

3.

'And I made the great Ashi Vanguhi; she comes in, amid the
family; she comes in, inside the fine royal palace.

4.

'Let Ashi, with fulness of welfare, follow the man who gladdens
the faithful with his gifts! she comes in, inside his family;
she comes in, inside his fine royal palace.

'With all sorts of flocks, with all victory, with all intelligence,
with all Glory, the great Ashi Vanguhi puts one foot inside his
family; she comes in, inside his fine royal palace.

5.

'Horses multiply a thousandfold, flocks multiply a thousandfold;
and so does his virtuous offspring, (as) the bright, glorious
star Tishtrya moves on equally, and so does the strong wind made
by Mazda, and so does the Glory of the Aryas.

6.

'And they bring increase on the tops of all mountains, down
the depths of all vales; they bring increase to all the growing
plants, the fair, the golden-hued. And they bring (away) the contagion
of Aekha, they bring (away) the fiend of death, Apaosha.

7.

'Hail to the bright and glorious star Tishtrya Hail to the
strong wind, made by Mazda! Hail to the Glory of the Aryas!

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

8.

'We worship the Ahuna Vairya.

'We worship Asha-Vahishta, the fairest Amesha-Spenta.

'We worship the rightly-spoken Words, fiend-smiting and healing.

'We worship the healing, well-spoken Words, the fiend-smiting.

'We worship the Mathra Spenta and the Law of Mazda, and (piety)
that delights in Haoma.

'We worship the Glory of the Aryas.

'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

9.

'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the Glory of the Aryas, made by Mazda.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.'

Go to [

|
Khorda Avesta: Contents

|

|
Ashtad Yasht

|

|
]


================================================================================
Yasht 19
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt19sbe.htm
================================================================================

Yt19

Glossary

AVESTA: YASHTS (Hymns of praise)

Edited by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995. Spelling has been changed to conform with
other texts in this series.

19. ZAMYAD YASHT ("Hymn to the Earth")

This digital edition copyright © 1995
by Joseph H. Peterson. All rights reserved.

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

This Yasht, inscribed to the Genius of the Earth, is devoted to
a description of the mountains and the kingly Glory (kavaem Hvareno),
which are invoked, together with the Earth, in the corresponding
formula of he Sirozah (par. 28) there is no Yasht devoted to the
Earth itself.

The mountains are simply enumerated (pars. 1-8). The rest of the
Yasht is devoted to the praise of the Hvareno, or, more precisely,
to that of those who possessed it, whose powers or feats are described.
The list begins with Ahura Mazda (par. 10), and closes with Saoshyant
(par. 89); that is to say, it begins with the beginning of the
world, and closes with its end. It includes the Amesha-Spentas
(par. 15), Haoshyangha (par. 26), Takhma Urupa (par. 28), Yima
(par. 31), Mithra (par. 35), Thraetaona (par. 36), Keresaspa (par.
38), the kings of the Kaianyan dynasty (pars. 66-72), Kavi Husravah
(par. 74), Zarathushtra (par. 79), Vishtaspa (par. 84). The unsuccessful
efforts of Franghrasyan to take possession of it are described
at length (pars. 56-64).

This Yasht would serve as a short history of the Iranian monarchy,
an abridged
Shah Namah
.

0.
May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto Mount Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, the seat of holy happiness;
unto the kingly Glory, made by Mazda; unto that Glory that cannot
be forcibly seized, made by Mazda,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I.

1.
The first mountain that rose up out of the earth, O Spitama
Zarathushtra! was the Haraiti Barez. That mountain stretches all
along the shores of the land washed by waters towards the east.

The second mountain was Mount Zeredho, outside Mount Manusha:
this mountain too stretches all along the shores of the land washed
by waters towards the east.

2.
From there grew up Mount Ushi-dhau, Ushi-darena, Mount Erezifya,
and Mount Fraorepa. The sixth was Mount Erezura. The seventh was
Mount Bumya. The eighth was Mount Raoidhita. The ninth was Mount
Mazishishvau. The tenth was Mount Antare-danghu. The eleventh
was Mount Erezisha. The twelfth was Mount Vaiti-gaesa.

3.
And Mount Adarana, Mount Bayana, Mount Ishkata Upairi-saena,
with the .... snows; the two Hamankuna mountains, the eight Vasna
mountains, the eight powerful Fravanku, the four Vidhvana summits;

4.
Mount Aezakha, Mount Maenakha, Mount Vakhedrakae, Mount Asaya,
Mount Tudhaskae, Mount Isavae, Mount Draoshishvau, Mount Sairivau,
Mount Nanghushmau, Mount Kakahyu, Mount Antare-Kangha;

5.
Mount Sichidava, Mount Ahuna, Mount Raemana, Mount Asha-stembana,
Mount Urunyo-vaidhkae, Mount Asnavant, Mount Ushaoma, Mount Ushta-hvarenah,
Mount Syamaka, Mount Vafrayau, Mount Vourusha;

6.
Amongst which stand Mount Jatara, Mount Adhutavau, Mount Spitavarena,
Mount Spento-data, Mount Kadrva-aspa, Mount Kaoirisa, Mount Taera,
Mount Bara-srayana, Mount Barana, Mount Frapayau, Mount Udrya,
and Mount Raevant, and all those heights to which men have given
the name of mount,

7.
To the number of two thousand mountains, and two hundred and
forty and four, O Spitama Zarathushtra!

8.
For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the awful kingly Glory. Unto the
awful kingly Glory we offer up the libations, the Haoma and meat,
the baresma, the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech,
the deeds, the libations, and the rightly-spoken words.

Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

II.

9.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda; most
conquering, highly working, that possesses health, wisdom, and
happiness, and is more powerful to destroy than all other creatures;

10.
That belongs to Ahura Mazda, as (through it) Ahura Mazda made
the creatures, many and good, many and fair, many and wonderful,
many and prosperous, many and bright;

11.
So that they may restore the world, which will (thenceforth)
never grow old and never die, never decaying and never rotting,
ever living and ever increasing, and master of its wish, when
the dead will rise, when life and immortality will come, and the
world will be restored at its wish;

12.
When the creation will grow deathless, - the prosperous creation
of the Good Spirit, - and the Druj shall perish, though she may
rush on every side to kill the holy beings; she and her hundredfold
brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

III.

14.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

15.
That belongs to the Amesha-Spentas, the bright ones, whose
looks perform their wish, tall, quickly coming to do, strong,
lordly, who are undecaying and holy;

16.
Who are all seven of one thought, who are all seven of one
speech, who are all seven of one deed; whose thought is the same,
whose speech is the same, whose deed is the same, whose father
and commander is the same, namely, the Maker, Ahura Mazda.

17.
Who see one another's soul thinking of good thoughts, thinking
of good words, thinking of good deeds, thinking of Garo-nmana,
and whose ways are shining as they go down to the libations;

18.
Who are the makers and governors, the shapers and overseers,
the keepers and preservers of these creations of Ahura Mazda.

19.
It is they who shall restore the world, which will (thenceforth)
never grow old and never die, never decaying and never rotting,
ever living and ever increasing, and master of its wish, when
the dead will rise, when life and immortality will come, and the
world will be restored at its wish;

20.
When the creation will grow deathless, - the prosperous creation
of the Good Spirit, - and the Druj shall perish, though she may
rush on every side to kill the holy beings; she and her hundredfold
brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

IV.

21.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

22.
That belongs to the gods in the heavens and to those in the
material world, and to the blessed ones, born or not yet born,
who are to perform the restoration of the world.

23.
It is they who shall restore the world, which will (thenceforth)
never grow old and never die, never decaying and never rotting,
ever living and ever increasing, and master of its wish, when
the dead will rise, when life and immortality will come, and the
world will be restored at its wish;

24.
When the creation will grow deathless, - the prosperous creation
of the Good Spirit, - and the Druj shall perish, though she may
rush on every side to kill the holy beings; she and her hundredfold
brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

V.

25.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

26.
That clave unto Haoshyangha, the Paradhata, for a long time,
when he ruled over the seven Karshvares of the earth, over the
Daevas and men, over the Yatus and the Pairikas, over the oppressors,
the blind, and the deaf; he who smote two-thirds of the Daevas
of Mazana and of the Varenya fiends.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

VI.

27.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

28.
That clave unto Takhma Urupa, the well-armed, while he ruled
over the seven Karshvares of the earth, over the paevas and men,
the Yatus and Pairikas, the oppressors, the blind, and the deaf;

29.
When he conquered all Daevas and men, all the Yatus and Pairikas,
and rode Angra Mainyu, turned into the shape of a horse, all around
the earth from one end to the other, for thirty years.

For its brightness and glory, I win offer it a sacrifice ....

VII.

30.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

31.
That clave unto the bright Yima, the good shepherd, for a
long time,
while he ruled over the seven Karshvares of the earth,
over the Daevas and men, the Yatus and Pairikas, the oppressors,
the blind, and the deaf;

32.
He who took from the Daevas both riches and welfare, both
fatness and flocks, both weal and Glory;

In whose reign both aliments
were never failing for feeding creatures,
flocks and men were undying, waters and plants were undrying;

33. In whose reign there was neither cold wind nor hot wind, neither
old age nor death, nor envy made by the Daevas,
in the times before
his lie, before he began to have delight in words of falsehood
and untruth.

34. But when he began to find delight in words of falsehood and
untruth,
the Glory was seen to flee away from him in the shape
of a bird. When his Glory had disappeared, then the great
Yima
Khshaeta, the good shepherd, trembled and was in sorrow before
his foes;
he was confounded, and laid him down on the ground.

35. The first time
when the Glory departed from the bright Yima,
the Glory went from Yima, the son of Vivanghant, in the shape
of a Varaghna bird.

Then Mithra seized that Glory, Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
whose ear is quick to hear, who has a thousand senses. We sacrifice
unto Mithra, the lord of all countries, whom Ahura Mazda has created
the most glorious of all the gods in the heavens.

36. The second time when the Glory departed from the bright Yima,
the Glory went from Yima, the son of Vivanghant, in the shape
of a Varaghna bird.

Then Thraetaona seized that Glory, he, the heir of the valiant
Athwya clan, who was the most victorious of all victorious men
next to Zarathushtra;

37.
Who smote Azhi Dahaka, the three-mouthed, the three-headed,
the six-eyed, who had a thousand senses, that most powerful, fiendish
Druj, that demon baleful to the world, the strongest Druj that
Angra Mainyu created against the material world, to destroy the
world of the good principle.

38.
The third time when the Glory departed from the bright Yima,
that Glory went from Yima, the son of Vivanghant, in the shape
of a Varaghna bird.

Then the manly-hearted Keresaspa seized that Glory; he who was
the sturdiest of the men of strength, next to Zarathushtra, for
his manly courage.

39.
For Manly Courage clave unto him. We worship Manly Courage,
firm of foot, unsleeping, quick to rise, and fully awake, that
clave unto Keresaspa;

40.
Who killed the snake Srvara, the horse-devouring, men-devouring,
yellow, poisonous snake, over which yellow poison flowed a thumb's
breadth thick. Upon him Keresaspa was cooking his food in a brass
vessel: at the time of noon, the fiend felt the heat, and stood
upon his feet: he rushed from under the brass vessel and upset
the boiling water: the manly-hearted Keresaspa fell back affrighted;

41.
Who killed the golden-heeled Gandarewa, that was rushing with
open jaws, eager to destroy the living world of the good principle;

Who killed the brood of Pathana, all the nine; and the brood of
Nivika, and the brood of Dashtayana;

Who killed the golden-crowned Hitaspa, and Vareshava, the son
of Dana and Pitaona, attended by many Pairikas;

42.
Who killed Arezo-shamana, him of the manly courage, who was
strong, well-beloved, hail, energetically rushing, fully awake,
never falling back....;

43.
Who killed Snavidhaka, him who killed with his nails, the
stone-handed: thus did he exclaim to all around: 'I am an infant
still, I am not yet of age: if I ever grow of age, I shall make
the earth a wheel, I shall make the heavens a chariot;

44.
'I shall bring down the Good Spirit from the shining Garo-nmana;
I shall make the Evil Spirit rush up from the dreary Hell. They
will carry my chariot, both the Good Spirit and the Evil One,
unless the manly-hearted Keresaspa kill me.'

The manly-hearted Keresaspa killed him, his life went away, his
spirit vanished.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

1. For six hundred and sixteen years and six months (Bundahishn 34.4).

2. See Yt. 5.26, text and notes.

3. Food and drink.

4. Cf. Yt. 15.16.

5. He pretended to be a god (Firdausi).

6. Doubtful: fraêshta.

7. Azhi Dahaka (Zohak) and his followers.

8. The Glory is described as departing three times, because it is
threefold, according as it belongs to the king considered as a
priest, warrior, or a husbandman. In that threefold character
it is identical with Adar Farnbag, Adar Gushasp, and Adar Burzin Mehr (p. 7, notes).

9. A raven, one of the incarnations of the Genius of Victory (Verethraghna, Warharam).
See Yt14.18-21, 35.

10. See Yt. 5.34.

VIII.

45.
We sacrifice unto the awful Glory, that cannot be forcibly
seized, made by Mazda ....

46.
For which the Good Spirit and the Evil One did struggle with
one another: for that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized they
flung each of them their darts most swift.

The Good Spirit flung a dart, and so did Vohu-Mano, and Asha-Vahishta
and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda.

The Evil Spirit flung a dart, and so did Akem-Mano, and Aeshma
of the wounding spear and Azhi Dahaka and Spityura, he who sawed
Yima in twain.

47.
Then forward came Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, thinking thus
in his heart: 'I want to seize that Glory that cannot be forcibly
seized.'

But Azhi Dahaka, the three-mouthed, he of the evil law, rushed
on his back, thinking of extinguishing it:

48.
'Here give it up to me; O Atar, son of Ahura Mazda: if thou
seizest that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized, I shall rush
upon thee, so that thou mayest never more blaze on the earth made
by Ahura and protect the world of the good principle.'

And Atar took back his hands, as the instinct of life prevailed,
so much had Azhi affrighted him.

49.
Then Azhi, the three-mouthed, he of the evil law, rushed forward,
thinking thus in his heart: 'I want to seize that Glory that cannot
be forcibly seized.'

But Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, advanced behind him, speaking
in these words:

50.
'There give it up to me, thou three-mouthed Azhi Dahaka. If
thou seizest that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized, then I
will enter thy hinder part, I will blaze up in thy jaws, so that
thou mayest never more rush upon the earth made by Mazda and destroy
the world of the good principle.'

Then Azhi took back his hands, as the instinct of life prevailed,
so much had Atar affrighted him.

51.
That Glory swells up and goes to the sea Vouru-Kasha. The
swift-horsed Son of the Waters seizes it at once: this is the
wish of the Son of the Waters, the swift-horsed: 'I want to seize
that Glory that cannot be forcibly seized, down to the bottom
of the sea Vouru-Kasha, in the bottom of the deep rivers.'

52.
We sacrifice unto the Son of the Waters, the swift-horsed,
the tall and shining lord, the lord of females; the male god,
who helps one at his appeal; who made man, who shaped man, a god
who lives beneath waters, and whose ear is the quickest to hear
when he is worshipped.

53.
'And whosoever of you, O men,' - thus said Ahura Mazda, -
'O holy Zarathushtra! shall seize that Glory that cannot be forcibly
seized, he has the gifts of an Athravan; whosoever shall long
for the illumination of knowledge, he has the gifts of an Athravan;
whosoever shall long for fulness of knowledge, he has the gifts
of an Athravan;

54.
'And Riches will cleave unto him, giving him full welfare,
holding a shield before him, powerful, rich of cattle and garments;
and Victory will cleave unto him, day after day; and likewise
Strength, that smites more than a year. Attended by that Victory,
he will conquer the havocking hordes; attended by that Victory,
he will conquer all those who hate him.' For its brightness and
glory, I will offer it a sacrifice....

IX.

55.
We sacrifice unto the awful Glory, that cannot be forcibly
seized, made by Mazda ....

56.
Which the Turanian ruffian Frangrasyan tried to seize in the
sea Vouru-Kasha. He stripped himself naked, wishing to seize that
Glory that belongs to the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and
to the holy Zarathushtra. But the Glory escaped, the Glory fled
away, the Glory changed its seat, and an arm of the sea Vouru-Kasha
was produced, namely, that lake that is called Lake Husravah.

57.
Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan rushed out of the
sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathushtra! thinking evil thoughts:
'.... I have not been able to conquer the Glory that belongs to
the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the holy Zarathushtra.

58.
'Then I will defile all corn and liquors, as to greatness,
goodness, and fairness.'

- 'Ahura Mazda will come against thee, ever eager to create new
creatures.'

Then the most crafty Turania Frangrasyan rushed down into the
sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathushtra!

59.
A second time he stripped himself naked, wishing to seize
that Glory that belongs to the Aryan nations, born and unborn,
and to the holy Zarathushtra. But the Glory escaped, the Glory
fled away, the Glory changed its seat, and an arm of the sea Vouru-Kasha
was produced, namely, that lake that is called Lake Vanghazdau.

60.
Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan rushed out of the
sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathushtra! thinking evil thoughts:
'.... I have not been able to conquer the Glory that belongs to
the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the holy Zarathushtra.

61.
'Then I will defile all corn and liquors, as to greatness,
goodness, and fairness.'

- 'Ahura Mazda will come against thee, ever eager to create new
creatures.'

Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan rushed down into the
sea Vouru-Kasha.

62.
A third time he stripped himself naked, wishing to seize the
Glory that belongs to the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and
to the holy Zarathushtra. But the Glory escaped, the Glory fled
away, the Glory changed its seat, and an arm was produced in the
sea Vouru-Kasha, namely, the water that is called Awzh-danva.

63.
Then the most crafty Turanian Frangrasyan rushed out of the
sea Vouru-Kasha, O Spitama Zarathushtra! thinking evil thought:
'.... I have not been able to conquer the Glory that belongs to
the Aryan nations, born and unborn, and to the holy Zarathushtra!'

64.
He was not able to seize the Glory that belongs to the Aryan
nations, born and unborn, and to the holy Zarathushtra.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

X.

65.
We sacrifice unto the awful Glory that cannot be forcibly
seized, made by Mazda ....

66.
That cleaves unto him who grows up there, where lies Lake
Kasava [Kasaoya], along with the Haetumant river; there where stands Mount
Ushidhau, surrounded by waters, that run from the mountain.

67.
It runs unto him, it flows and swells unto him, bringing good
pastures and fine horses, bringing plenty, full of glory; with
beauty and weal; powerful and friendly, rich of pastures, prolific
and golden. It runs unto him, it flows and swells unto him, bright
and glorious, making the white .... grow, smiting away all plagues.

68.
And there comes with him a horse's strength, there comes with
him a camel's strength, there comes with him a man's strength,
there comes with him the kingly Glory: and there is in him, O
holy Zarathushtra! so much of kingly Glory as might extinguish
at once all the non-Aryan nations.

69.
And then (through it) living creatures may keep away hunger
and death, living creatures (may keep away) cold and heat. Such
is the kingly Glory, the keeper of the Aryan nations and of the
five kinds of animals, made to help the faithful and the Law of
the worshippers of Mazda.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

XI.

70.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

71.
That clave unto Kavi Kavata, and unto Kavi Aipivohu, and unto
Kavi Usadha, and unto Kavi Arshan, and unto Kavi Pisina, and unto
Kavi Byarshan, and unto Kavi Syavarshan;

72.
So that they were all of them brave, all of them strong, all
of them healthful, all of them wise, all of them happy in their
wishes, all of them powerful kings.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

XII.

73.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

74.
That clave unto Kavi Husravah for the well-shapen Strength,
for the Victory made by Ahura, for the crushing Ascendant; for
the righteousness of the law, for the innocence of the law, for
the unconquerable power of the law; for the extermination of the
enemies at one stroke;

75.
And for the vigour of health, for the Glory made by Mazda,
for the health of the body, and for a good, virtuous offspring,
wise, chief in assemblies, bright, and clear-eyed, that frees
[their father] from the pangs [of hell], of good intellect; and
for that part in the blessed world that falls to wisdom and to
those who do not follow impiety;

76.
And for a dominion full of splendour, for a long, long life,
and for all boons and remedies; 77. So that king Husravah [had
the lead] all along the long race, and he could not pass through
the forest, he, the murderer, who was fiercely striving against
him on horseback; the lord Kavi Husravah prevailed over all; he
put in bonds Frangrasyan and Keresavazda, to avenge the murder
of his father Syavarshana, a man, and of Aghraeratha, a semi-man.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

XIII.

78.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

79.
That clave unto the holy Zarathushtra, so that he thought
according to the Law, spake according to the Law, and did according
to the Law; so that he was the holiest in holiness in all the
living world, the best-ruling in exercising rule, the brightest
in brightness, the most glorious in glory, the most victorious
in victory.

80.
At his sight the Daevas rushed away; at his sight the (demoniac)
malices were extinguished; at his sight the Jainis drew hack their
ways from the mortals and, lamenting and wailing, laid violent
hands on the Daevas.

81.
And that one prayer, the Ahuna Vairya, which the holy Zarathushtra
sang and repeated four times, with a song that waxed louder and
louder, drove back all the Daevas beneath the earth, and took
off from them sacrifice and prayer.

82.
It was it, the Glory of Zarathushtra, that the Turanian ruffian
Frangrasyan tried to seize to rule over all the Karshvares; round
about the seven Karshvares did that ruffian Frangrasyan rush,
trying to seize the Glory of Zarathushtra. But that Glory escaped
to hidden inlets of the sea; and there those two made my will
roll on; they entered my will, as it was my wish, Ahura Mazda's,
and as it was the wish of the Law of Mazda.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

XIV.

83.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

84.
That clave unto king Vistaspa, so that he thought according
to the Law, spake according to the Law, and did according to the
Law; so that he professed that Law, destroying his foes and causing
the Daevas to retire.

85.
Who, driving the Druj before him, sought wide room for the
holy religion; who, driving the Druj before him, made wide room
for the holy religion; who made himself the arm and support of
this law of Ahura, of this law of Zarathushtra;

86.
Who took her, standing bound, from the hands of the Hunus,
and established her to sit in the middle [of the world], high
ruling, never falling back, holy, nourished with plenty of cattle
and pastures, blessed with plenty of cattle and pastures.

87.
The valiant king Vishtaspa conquered all enemies, Tathravant
of the evil law, Peshana, the worshipper of the Daevas, and the
fiendish wicked Arejat-aspa and the other wicked Hvyaonas.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

XV.

88.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

89.
That will cleave unto the victorious Saoshyant and his helpers,
when he shall restore the world, which will (thenceforth) never
grow old and never die, never decaying and never rotting, ever
living and ever increasing, and master of its wish, when the dead
will rise, when life and immortality will come, and the world
will be restored at its wish;

90.
When the creation will grow deathless, - the prosperous creation
of the Good Spirit, - and the Druj shall perish, though she may
rush on every side to kill the holy beings; she and her hundredfold
brood shall perish, as it is the will of the Lord.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

XVI.

91.
We sacrifice unto the awful kingly Glory, made by Mazda ....

92.
When Astvat-ereta shall rise up from Lake Kasava [Kasaoya], a friend
of Ahura Mazda, a son of Vispa-taurvairi, knowing the victorious
knowledge.

It was that Glory that Thraetaona bore with him when Azhi Dahaka
was killed;

93.
That Frangrasyan, the Turanian, bore when Drvau was killed,
when the Bull was killed;

That king Husravah bore when Frangrasyan, the Turanian, was killed;

That king Vishtaspa bore, when he victoriously maintained Holiness
against the host of the fiends and took off the Druj from the
world of the good principle.

94.
He, with the eye of intelligence, shall look down upon all
the creatures of the Paeshish, her of the evil seed: he shall
look upon the whole living world with the eye of plenty, and his
look shall deliver to immortality the whole of the living creatures.

95.
And there shall his friends come forward, the friends of Astvat-ereta,
who are fiend-smiting, well-thinking, well-speaking, well-doing,
following the good law, and whose tongues have never uttered a
word of falsehood.

Before them shall Aeshma of the wounding spear, who has no Glory,
bow and flee; he shall smite the most wicked Druj, her of the
evil seed, born of darkness.

96.
Akem-Mano smites, but Vohu-Mano shall smite him; the Word
of falsehood smites, but the Word of truth shall smite it. Haurvatat
and Ameretat shall smite both hunger and thirst: Haurvatat and
Ameretat shall smite the evil hunger and the evil thirst. The
evil-doing Angra Mainyu bows and flees, becoming powerless.

For its brightness and glory, I will offer it a sacrifice ....

97.
Yatha ahu vairya: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness
....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of Mount Ushi-darena, made by Mazda, the seat of holy happiness;
of the kingly Glory, made by Mazda; of the Glory that cannot be
forcibly seized, made by Mazda.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

Yt19

Glossary


================================================================================
Yasht 21
Source: https://www.avesta.org/ka/yt21sbe.htm
================================================================================

21. VANANT YASHT

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

0.

May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!....

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness....

Unto the star Vanant, made by Mazda,

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

1.

We sacrifice unto the star Vanant, made by Mazda, the holy
and master of holiness.

I will sacrifice unto Vanant, strong, invoked by his own name,
healing, in order to withstand the accursed and most foul Khrafstras
of the most abominable Angra Mainyu.

2.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the star Vanant, made by Mazda.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good....

[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the bright,
all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

Go to [

|
Khorda Avesta: Contents

|

|
Vanant Yasht

|
]


================================================================================
Aogemadaeca
Source: https://www.avesta.org/fragment/aogsbe.htm
================================================================================

Aog

Avesta

Glossary

Aogemadaeca

,
American Edition, 1898, Vol. III, pg 372 ff.

'The Aogemadaeca,' says Dastur Jamaspji,' is a treatise that inculcates
a sort of serene resignation to death.' It is a sermon on death,
originally written in Pahlavi, but preserved to us in a Parsi
transcription; in which original Avesta texts are developed or
paraphrased. These Avesta quotations amount to twenty-nine, of
which twenty-four are new. A good edition of the Parsi text, with
a Sanskrit translation, based upon a manuscript of A. D. 1497,
has been published by Prof. Geiger (Erlangen, 1879). Dastur Jamaspji
possesses two Pahlavi retranscriptions of an independent Parsi
manuscript, which contain useful corrections and additions. We
have thought it necessary to give here a complete translation
of the treatise, as the Avesta quotations by themselves do not
present either a continuous or a complete text. Unlike the Avesta
in the Nirangistan, they are not the principal, but only the secondary
text.

1.

Aogemaideca usmahica visamadaeca
[Y41.5] ('We come,
rejoice, and submit').

(Parsi translation:) I come, I accept, I resign;

2. (Parsi gloss:)

I come into this world, I accept evil, I resign myself to
death;

3.

Shato-manau vahishto-urvano
('With the mind in joy
and the soul in bliss'):

(Gloss:) In joy is he who realises the wish of his soul.

4.

May the accursed Gana Mainyo be smitten, destroyed, and broken,
he who has no knowledge, who has evil knowledge, who is full of
death,

5.

Who destroys the body of the immortal soul!

6.

May the immortal soul have its share in Paradise!

7.

And may the pleasure and comfort that will dissipate the pain
of the immortal soul come to us!

8.

At the fourth dawn, may the holy, strong Sraosha, and Rashn
Rast, and the good Vae, and Ashtad the victorious, and Mihr of
the rolling country-side, and the Fravashis of the righteous,
and the other virtuous spirits come to meet the soul of the blessed
one,

9.

And make the immortal soul pass over the Chinvad bridge easily,
happily, and fearlessly!

10.

And may Vohuman, the Amshaspand, intercede for the soul of
the blessed one,

11.

And introduce it to Ohrmazd and the Amshaspands!

12.

Usehihstad Vohu-Mano; haca gatvo zaranyo-kereto
('Up
rises Vohu-Mano from his golden throne').

13.

He will take the blessed one by the hand,

14.

And make him rejoice as much as does the man who rejoices
most when on the pinnacle of nobility and glory.

15.

And the Fravashis of the righteous will bring to the soul
of the blessed those blessed aliments that are made at the time
of Maidyo-zarm:

16.

Hvarethanam he beretam zaremayehe raoghnahe
('Let
them bring unto him the butter of Maidhyoi-zaremaya!').

Aliments of waters, wine, sugar, and honey!

17.

Yatha va erezato paiti, yatha va zaranyo paiti, yatha
va kacid gaonanam
('Of silver, or gold, or any other kind').

The Amshaspand Vohuman will give to the soul of the blessed
one clothes embroidered with gold and a golden throne;

18.

And the demon Ahriman will be powerless to inflict any harm
or damage on the soul of the blessed one.

19.

Pasca parairistim daeva drvanto duzhdaungho baodhem avatha
frateresenti, yatha maeshi vehrkavaiti vehrkad haca frateresaiti

('The wicked evil- doing Daevas tremble at his perfume after death,
as doth a sheep on which a wolf is pouncing').

As the sheep, on which the wolf is pouncing, tremble at the
odour of the wolf, so these Drujes tremble at the perfume of the
blessed one.

20.

For whosoever has been born and whosoever shall be born must
act in such a way that, when the moment comes to leave this world,
he may have Paradise as his portion and Garothman as his reward.

21.

There is a passage in which Ohrmazd said to Zarathushtra:
'I created, O Spitama Zarathushtra! good renown and salvation
of the soul;'

22.

(That is to say, good renown in this world and salvation of
the soul in the next).

And in case of doubt we must consider as being saved,

23.

Him who, for all we have seen and known, has been a believer
in body and soul, and has rejoiced Ohrmazd and afflicted Ahriman,

24.

And whoever has had this for his main object, or has been
the source of this benefit, that from him should flow prosperity
and joy, and from him should flow no harm and no pain.

And there is a passage in which the soul says to the body:

25.

Aad mam tanvo ithyejanguhaiti manya manangha humatem
.

O thou, my perishable body, think good thoughts with thy mind!

26.

Aad mam tanvo ithyejanguhaiti hizva mruidhi hukhtem
.

O thou, my perishable body, speak good words with thy tongue!

27.

Aad mam tanvo ithyejanguhaiti zastaeibya vareza hvarestem
shyaothanem
.

O thou, my perishable body, do good deeds with thy hands!

28.

Ma mam tanvo ithyejanguhaiti angrai vaire fraspayois yim
khrvantem aithivantem, yim daevim afraderesavantem frakerentad
angro mainyus pouru-mahrko bunem angheus temanghahe yad ereghato
daozanghahe
.

O thou, my perishable body, do not throw me down into the
Var of Angra Mainyu, terrible, dreadful, (frightful), dark, undiscernible
(for the darkness there is so dense that it can be grasped with
the hand), which Gana Mainyu fabricated at the bottom of the dark
world of endless hell.

29.

There is a passage in which Ohrmazd says to Zarathushtra:

30.

I created, O Spitama Zarathustra! the stars, the moon, the
sun, and the red burning fire, the dogs, the birds, and the five
kinds of animals; but, better and greater than all, I created
the righteous man who has truly received from me the Praise of
Asha in the good Religion.

31.

But without any reason men adhere to that evil guide, Passion,
created by the demons; so that they do not think of Fate,

32.

And by the bent of their nature they forget death.

33.

They do not keep in mind the working of Time and the transientness
of the body,

34.

They ever go wandering about on the way of desire,

35.

They are tossed in doubt by evil Passion,

36.

They clothe themselves with spite, in the course of strife,
for the sake of vanishing goods;

37.

They are intoxicated with pride in their youth,

38.

And shall be full of regrets at the end of their time.

39.

For if one say: 'On this earth of the seven Karshvares there
is somebody going to die,' everybody ought to think: 'Perhaps
it is I,'

40.

Had he sense enough to know that every creature that has been
created and has had existence shall die, and that the unseen,
deceiving Astivihad comes for every one.

41.

Hamaschid paro avangho isente mashya-kaungho
('All
men wish for supplies').

(Now) when a man sets out on a journey, he takes provisions
with him;

42.

If it be for one day's march, he takes provisions for two
days;

43.

If it be for two days' march, he takes provisions for three;

44.

If it be for ten days' march, he takes provisions for fifteen;

45.

And he thinks that he will come back in health to his well-beloved
friends, parents, and brethren.

46.

How then is it that men take no provisions for that unavoidable
journey,

47.

On which one must go once for all, for all eternity?

48.

Chim aoshanghau aoshanguhaiti astem isaiti tanva, kim
uruna, kim frazainti, chim va gaethahvo mahrkathem?

How is it that a mortal can wish for another mortal the annihilation
of his body (that his body should be no more), or of his soul
(that his soul should be damned), or death for his children or
for his cattle (that his cattle should perish), if he has sense
enough to know that he himself is mortal?

49.

Anamarezhdiko zi asti havai marezhdikai.

For he is pitiless to himself (he does not pity himself) and
none of the others shall pity him.

50.

Blind are all those who, on this earth, do not follow the
religion, do not benefit the living, and do not commemorate the
dead.

51.

Oiuim tad va .... ayare ajasaiti, Spitama Zarathushtra!
aeva va khshapa
('For there comes a day, O Spitama Zarathustra!
or a night').

There comes a day, O Spitama Zarathustra! or a night, when
the master leaves the cattle, or the cattle leave the master,
or the soul leaves that body full of desires;

52.

But his virtue, which is of all existences the greatest, the
best, the finest, never parts from a man.

53.

Ayare amithnaiti juye tanush frayaere ayan bavaiti hubadhro
hupaitiznato, adha apare ayan duzhathrem
('Every day the
living man ought to think that in the forenoon he is happy and
in credit; in the afternoon disgrace may come').

Every day every living body ought to think (for that may happen
any day): in the forenoon I am happy, rich, in credit (that is
to say, well treated by the king);

54.

And every day other people eagerly wish him evil; that he
should be torn away from his palace, that he should have his head
cut off and his wealth seized upon. Every day the living body
is thrown for food to the birds that fly in the empty sky.

55.

This is the way of things on this earth.

56.

Deusgdatayau fraeshta drvanto duzdaungho
('It is
ignorance that ruins most people, those ill-informed').

It is ignorance that ruins most people, those ill-informed;
both amongst those who have died, and those who shall die.

57.

Aad mraod Ahuro Mazdau frakeresto Asto-vidhotush zirijau

(read
zivijau
?)
apairiayo
('Ahura Mazda said:
Astovidhotush has been created a destroyer of the living and one
whom none escape ).

Ohrmazd said: Astivihad has been created for the destruction
of mortals (when the mortals see him, they tremble so much that
they are unable to struggle with the Druj) and no one escapes
him (as said before).

58.

Yahmad hacha naechish bungayad aoshanguhatam mashyanam

('From whom not one of mortal men can escape').

From whom not one of mortal men can escape; no one has escaped
to this day, and no one will escape hereafter.

59.

Noid aethrapatayo, noid danhupatayo, noid sasevishtau,
noid asevishtau
('Neither aethrapaitis, nor chiefs of countries,
neither well-doers, nor evil-doers').

Neither the herbed (the Mobedan Mobed), nor the chief of the
country (the King of kings), neither well-doers, nor evil-doers.

60.

Noid usyastacho, noid niya
('Neither those who run
up, nor those who go down').

Neither those who run up (those who fly in the empty sky),
like Kahos; with all his strength and kingly glory, he could not
escape from Astivihad.

61.

Nor those who go down deep (who hide themselves under the
earth), like Afrasyab the Turk, who made himself an iron palace
under the earth, a thousand times the height of a man, with a
hundred columns;

62.

In that palace he made the stars, the moon, and the sun go
round, making the light of day.

63.

In that palace he did everything at his pleasure,

64.

And he lived the happiest life.

65.

With all his strength and witchcraft, he could not escape
from Astivihad.

66.

Naedha frakanem anhau zemo yad pathanayau skarenayau duraeparayau
.

Nor he who dug this wide, round earth, with extremities that
lie afar, like Dahak,

67.

Who went from the East to the West, searching for immortality
and did not find it.

68.

With all his strength and power, he could not escape from
Astivihad.

69.

Anye angheush frasho-charethrau
('Except the producers
of the world of resurrection').

Thus until the author of the resurrection, Saoshyos: until
Saoshyos comes, no one shall escape from Astivihad.

70.

To every one comes the unseen, deceiving Astivihad,

71.

Who accepts neither compliments, nor bribe,

72.

Who is no respecter of persons,

73.

And ruthlessly makes men perish.

74.

And this glorious One must go the way he never went,

75.

See what he never saw,

76.

And discuss with him whom no one can deceive or mislead.

77.

Pairithwo bavaiti pantau yim danush paiti fra bunad tachintish;
hau did aevo apairithwo, yo vayaosh anamarezhdikahe
: --

The way may be traversed which is barred by a river springing
from the deep; but one way cannot be traversed, namely, the way
of the pitiless Vayu.

78.

Pairithwo bavaiti pantau yim azhish paiti gaustavau, aspanghadho,
viranghadho, viraja, anamarezhdika; hau did aevo apairithwo, yo
vayaosh anamarezhdikahe
:

The way may be traversed which is barred by a serpent as big
as an ox, horse-devouring, man-devouring, man-killing, and pitiless;
but one way cannot be traversed, namely, the way of the pitiless
Vayu.

79.

Pairithwo bavaiti pantau yim aresho paiti akhshaeno anamarezhdiko;
hau did aevo apairithwo, yo vayaosh anamarezhdikahe:

The way may be traversed which is barred by a brown bear,
[with a white forehead, man-killing, and] pitiless; but one way
cannot be traversed, namely, the way of the pitiless Vayu.

80.

Pairithwo bavaiti pantau yim mashyo gadho paiti aevojano
anamarezhdiko; hau did aevo apairithwo, yo vayaosh anamarezhdikahe
:
-- The way may be traversed which is defended by a highwayman
who kills at one stroke, (who stops the way and lets no one pass
alive); but one way cannot be traversed, namely, the way of the
pitiless Vayu.

81.

Pairithwo bavaiti pantau yo haenayau chakhra-vaityau vyazdayau;
hau did aevo apairithwo, yo vayaosh anamarezhdikahe
:

The way may be traversed which is held by a horde armed with
discs, and uplifted spears (that is, carrying spears to pierce
men); but one way cannot be traversed, namely, the way of the
pitiless Vayu.

81 bis.

Aad mraod Ahuro Mazdau: dushkhratum apairi gaetham athravayad
gatham
.

[This incomplete quotation is found only in the Pahlavi transcription,
with a corrupt paraphrase as follows: 'Ohrmazd said, "The
man without intelligence (that is, with a bad intelligence) ...
who has not sung the Gathas (that is, who has not performed the
sacrifice; cf Nirang. 41) has no good renoun on this earth nor
bliss in heaven (cf. 21, 22)..."']

82.

Yatha drvau gaom isti, uta drvau aspem isti, uta drvau
maeshinem yavanghem isti:

The wicked acquire cattle, the wicked acquire horses, the
wicked acquire sheep and corn; but the wicked tyrant does not
acquire a store of good deeds.

83.

Seek ye for a store of good deeds, O Zarathushtra, men and
women! for a store of good deeds is full of salvation, O Zarathustra!

84.

Pasnush gavo, pasnush aspa, pasnush erezhatem zaranim,
pasnush naro chiryo takhmo
:

(For) the ox turns to dust, the horse turns to dust, silver
and gold turn to dust, the valiant strong man turns to dust; [the
bodies of all men mingle with the dust. What do not mingle with
the dust are the Ashem-vohu which a man recites in this world
and his almsgiving to the holy and righteous].

85.

For if there were or could be any escape from death, the first
of the world, Gayomard, king of the Mountain, [would have escaped],

86.

Who for three thousand years kept the world free from death
and old age, from hunger, thirst, and evil;

87.

Yet, when death came over him, he delivered up his body and
could not struggle with death.

88.

Or there was Hoshang, the Peshdadian,

89.

Who destroyed two-thirds of all the evil creatures of Ahriman;

90.

Yet, when death came over him, he delivered up his body and
could not struggle with death.

91.

Or there was Tahmuraf, the well-armed, the son of Vivanghat,

92.

Who made the Demon of demons, Gana Mainyo, his steed, and
extorted from him the seven kinds of writing;

93.

Yet, when death came over him, he delivered up his body and
could not struggle with death.

94.

Or there was Jim, the Shed, the good shepherd, the son of
Vivanghat; (he was Shed, that is to say, shining; he was a good
shepherd, that is to say, he kept in good condition troops of
men and herds of animals);

95.

Who, for 616 years, 6 months and 13 days, kept this world
free from death and old age, and kept away greed and need from
the creation of Ohrmazd;

96.

Yet, when death came over him, he delivered up his body and
could not struggle with death.

97.

Or there was Dahak, he of the evil religion, who kept the
world under his tyranny during a thousand years, less one day,

98.

And introduced into the world many ways of witchcraft and
evil-doing;

99.

Yet, when death came over him, he delivered up his body and
could not struggle with death.

100.

Or there was Fredun, the Athwyan,

101.

Who smote and bound Azi Dahak, that great evil-doer; he put
in chains the Devs of Mazandaran, and introduced into the world
a number of talismans;

102.

Yet, when death came over him, he delivered up his body and
could not struggle with death.

103.

I am grateful to the Lord Ohrmazd.

104.

I think thus in a grateful spirit: the beast of burden does
not throw off its burden: fate has come, it cannot be thrown away.

105.

May the blessed one have Paradise as his portion!

106.

As to the righteous man who has come to this banquet, who
has shared this banquet, may he for each step get nearer to the
bright Paradise, the all-happy Garothman, by twelve hundred steps!

107.

When he is approaching it, may his merits increase!

108.

When he is leaving it, may his sin be uprooted!

109.

May righteousness and goodness prevail!

110.

May his soul enter the Garothman!

111.

I am one of the righteous.

Atha jamyad
: May it happen according to this wish
of mine!

Humatanam
. All the good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds, done or to be done, here or elsewhere, we seize upon
and we transmit them, that we may be in the number of the righteous.

Aog

Avesta

Glossary


================================================================================
Afrin-i Zartosht
Source: https://www.avesta.org/fragment/azsbe.htm
================================================================================

azsbe.htm

Glossary

Afrin Paighambar Zartusht

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

1.

'I am a pious man, who speaks words of blessing.'

'Thou appearest unto me full of Glory.'

And Zarathushtra spake unto king Vishtaspa, saying: 'I bless thee,
O man! O lord of the country! with the living of a good life,
of an exalted life, of long life. May thy men live long! May thy
women live long! May sons be born unto thee of thy own body!

2.

'Mayest thou have a son like Jamaspa, and may he bless thee
as (Jamaspa blessed] Vishtaspa (the lord) of the country!

'Mayest thou be most beneficent, like ...

'Mayest thou be fiend-smiting, like Thraetaona!

'Mayest thou be strong, like Jamaspa!

'Mayest thou be well-armed, like Takhma-Urupa!

3.

'Mayest thou be glorious, like Yima Khshaeta, the good shepherd!

'Mayest thou be instructed with a thousand senses, like Azhi Dahaka,
of the evil law!

'Mayest thou be awful and most strong, like Keresaspa!

'Mayest thou be a wise chief of assemblies, like Urvakhshaya!

'Mayest thou be beautiful of body and without fault, like Syavarshana!

4.

'Mayest thou be rich in cattle, like an Athwyanide!

'Mayest thou be rich in horses, like Pourushaspa!

'Mayest thou be holy, like Zarathushtra Spitama!

'Mayest thou be able to reach the Rangha, whose shores lie afar,
as Vafra Navaza was!

'Mayest thou be beloved by the gods and reverenced by men.

5.

May ten sons be born of you! In three of them mayest thou
be an Athravan! In three of them mayest thou be a warrior! In
three of them mayest thou be a tiller of the ground! And may one
be like thyself, O Vishtaspa!

6.

'Mayest thou be swift-horsed, like the Sun!

'Mayest thou be resplendent, like the moon!

'Mayest thou be hot-burning, like fire!

'Mayest thou have piercing rays, like Mithra!

'Mayest thou be tall-formed and victorious, like the devout Sraosha!

7.

'Mayest thou follow a law of truth, like Rashnu!

'Mayest thou be a conqueror of thy foes, like Verethraghna, made
by Ahura!

Mayest thou have fulness of welfare, like Rama Hvastra!

'Mayest thou be freed from sickness and death, like king Husravah!

8.

'Then the blessing goes for the bright, all-happy, blissful
abode of the holy Ones.

'May it happen unto thee according to my blessing!

"Let us embrace and propagate the good thoughts, good words,
and good deeds that have been done and that will be done here
and elsewhere, that we may be in the number of the good.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness
....

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, .... give him the
bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.'

azsbe.htm

Glossary


================================================================================
Frahang-i Oim
Source: https://www.avesta.org/fragment/fsbe.htm
================================================================================

fsbe

Glossary

Avesta: Frahang-i Oim (English)

Avesta fragments in the Avesta-Pahlavi Frahang.

Tr. by James Darmesteter, SBE V, New York, 1898

The oldest Avestan dictionary in existence, the so-called Avesta-Pahlavi
Frahang or Frahang-i Oim [1], contains a number of Avestan sentences
or fragments of sentences, which are adduced as instances of the
Avestan words. They amount to the number of seventy, of which
forty-eight are new. We thought it necessary to give the translation
of these forty-eight fragments only. The indications of pages
refer to the printed edition.

1 a (pp. 6-7). aêdha. The skin on the head.

There are two, one greater and one lesser, as it is said in the
Nigadum:

Which is the greater aêdha? -- That one which is on the
posterior part of the skull.

Which is the lesser one? -- That one which is on the anterior
part of the skull.

1 b (p.7). The head (vaghdhanem) of a man.

One bone of the skull.

All the strokes that [have pierced] the skull are counted [tanâfûhr]
[3].

The others shall pay the hvara [4] penalty.

2 a (p. 9) With victorious eloquence.

2 b. A fine, well considered, well balanced, obedient [5] speech.

2 c. An honest man who knows how to speak, for instance, a wise
man who makes intercession [6].

2 d. One whose words are accepted.

3 (p. 11). Sovereign, unopposed.

4 (p. 11). Good renown here below, and long bliss to the soul
[7].

5 (p. 11). All the bodily world shall become free frorn old age
and death, from corruption and rot, forever and ever [8].

6 (p. 12). A horse of first value, amongst the finest of the country,
is as much as four oxen and our cows three years old.

7 (p. 12). As much as this earth.

8 (p. 12). The smallest of those stars is as large as the head
of a man of middle size [9].

9 (p.12). An ashti in front, as much in depth [10]

10 (p.13). There where the sun rises.

11 (p. 13). There where Ahura Mazda will give you prosperity.

12 (p.14) [11]. He who to a plaintiff does not proffer place, ordeal,
and time of appointment [12];

and all the operations of justice, conformable to the law and
the rule, worked out by the Ahu and the Ratu, according to the
laws of Asha Vahishta...

13 (p.14). He who says to a man: Make amends unto me.

14 (p.14). When two men appoint a time [13]...

15 (pp. 14-15). As long as he has life.

16. And the young Gayo-Maratan [Gayomard][14].

17. In the time when those men were, O Zarathushtra!

18 (p. 15). To the lesser man labor, to the greater one, commandment
(?).

19. On went Pourusaspa, on go these sons of Thraetaona's (?).

20. He makes himself guilty of the yâta sin [15].

21 a (p. 16). A year's delay for a vîrô-mazô
contract [16].

21 b. They [17] a boiled up, they fell back.

22. yaêtush zaêmanô (?)

.
yaoshchina surahê (?)

24. Let one pluck stems, three stems [18].

25. The edge of a razor.

26. If they have come [or have not come].

27. The progeny and son of Ahura Mazda.

28 (p. 17). The several sorts of corn [[grain]].

29. I offer up the sacrifice to the Frazdânava waters [19].

30. Who is the judge who knows the law?

It is the one who sees the due decision [20].

31 (p. 18). And clothes magnificently wrought.

32. Lands fit for tillage.

33 (p. 19). All the agreements in the world.

34 (p. 23). ... happiness with his eyes [21].

35 (p. 30). Goods carried by force.

36 (p. 31). gathwô-shtachad

37. thwãm khratush (?)

38. Which, recited to Mazda, protects the end [22].

39 (p. 38). The fire of Ahura Mazda receives food three times
in summer, twice in winter [23]; thus does the fire of the faithful
man [24].

40 (p. 39). Fifteen sheep, their hind-feet.

41 (p. 40). Anywhere in this world. -- Whosoever in the bodily
world. -- Whatsoever of the world of the good principle.

42 (p. 41). Chvaiti aêtshaya (K'. aêtashaya).

43. As much as twelve steps antare thwãm (?)

44. Twice a Dakhshmaiti is a Yujyashti [25].

Twice as much as a Hâthra is a Tachara [26].

45 (p. 42). From the coming of the light [27]...

46 (p. 43). The longest day is the day of twelve Hâthras
[28].

47. The shortest Hâthra is of three words [29].

48. Three steps of that sort of steps [30].

Here is for the judge, here is for the witness [31].

Here is for the suit, here is for the suitors.

NOTES:

1. Haug-Hoshangji,
An Old Zend-Pahlavi Glossary
, Bombay,
1867.

2. The
Nigadum
is the fifteenth Nask, the first of the seven Legal
Nasks. It contained thirty Fargards, the third of which, named

Reshistan
(a treatise on the wounds), gave an enumeration of the
divers members of the body, numbering seventy-six. The fragments
1 a-1 b are very likely taken from that Fargard. -- For an analysis
of the
Nigadum
, see

Denkard Book 8, ch. 16-20
(in West, Pahlavi
Texts, IV).

3. Which implies a punishment of two hundred Sraosho-Charana strokes.
The words in brackets are wanting in the text: they are supplied
from the Pahlavi translation.

4. The hvara or khor penalty: thirty strokes with the Sraosho-Charana
(Vd4.30, 31).

5. In accordance with the instructions of the Ratu or Dastur.

6. Who makes Jadangoi: see
Tahmuras' Fragments
, 47, note.

7. Good renown in this world and bliss in the other.
See
Y62.6
;

Yt17.22
, and Tansar's letter to the King of Tabanstan: 'He may
be called a great king wno takes more to heart the weal of the
future than the present time, in order to deserve a good name
in this world and a good seat in the next.' (Journal Asiatique,
1894. I, 512-513)

8. Cf. Yt19.11, 23, 89; Yt24.45.

9. 'Amongst the stars (says the
Greater Bundahish
), the larger
ones are as large as a chachai-house (?) ; the middle stars are
as large as a caharakan naptishu(?); the lesser ones are as large
as the head of a domestic ox. The moon is as large as a riding-ground,
two hasars long the sun is as large as Eranwej (thus in Anaxagoras'
astronomy the sun has the dimensions of Peloponnesus). -- From
a comparison between the
Greater Bundahish
and the Avestan passage
quoted in the Farhang it appears that the measurement of the stars
was discussed several times and not without slight variations
in the Avesta (most likely in the cosmological Damdad Nask).

10. Cf. Vd13.30.

11. This fragment and the two following seem to be taken from
the Nigadum Nask.

12. The defendant, if conscious of his innocence, will propose
that he should go through the whole process of one of the judicial
ordeals.

13. For an ordeal.

14. Gayo-Maratan, Gayomard, the first man. Cf. Yt13.87.

15. Yata, yat: the sin of breaking a man's leg.

16. A contract to the amount of a man (valued 150 istirs=500 dirhems).

17. The waters.

18. For the Baresman (Y57.6).

19. A river or lake in Saistan, where Vishtaspa sacrificed to
the Goddess of Waters (Yt5.108).

20. He sees the right and legal decision which results from the
facts of the case. -- Cf. West, Pahlavi Texts, IV, 64, note.

21. This refers to the good eye, to some beneficent being who
sends luck with his look: cf. Yt19.94, and reversely Yasna 9.29.

22. This refers perhaps to the Ashem Vohu, which, heing recited
by a man with his dying breath, saves his soul (Yt21.15).

23. The fire is fed three times a day in summer, at the thrce
Gahs of the day; only twice in winter, as in winter there are
only two Gahs, the Rapithwin being included in Hawan.

24. There will be two meals in winter, one in the morning, another
in the evening. In summer there is a third meal, at noon (cf.
Y9.11). -- The passage thirty-nine is taken from the Sagadum Nask
Cf. West, Pahlavi Texts, IV, 480).

25. A Yujyasti

being 16,000 paces, a Dakhshmaiti is 8000
paces (cf. West, ibid. 56, note).

26. A Hathra being 1000 paces, a Tachara is as much as 2000 paces.

27. The coming of the light (raochangham fragati) is the name
of the last watch of the night.

28. Hathra is a measure for time as well as for space. A summer
day (says the Bundahishn, 25.5) is of twelve hasars; a winter
day is of six hasars.'

29. The uses and values of the Hathra are most diverse: as a measure
for short intervals of time, it is the time needed to pronounce
three words.

30. The complete meaning of the sentence would seem to be: 'The
judge and the witness stand in a circle of three steps' (Farhang).

31. The Farhang has: 'All the speeches of the suit ought to he
held within three steps; and both pleaders -- both defendant and
plaintiff -- should stand within a circle of three steps;' so
that everybody may hear distinctly the whole of the debate.

fsbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Hadhokht Nask
Source: https://www.avesta.org/fragment/hsbe.htm
================================================================================

hsbe

Glossary

Avesta: Fragments:

Hadhokht Nask

East, American Edition, 1898.)

1.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'What is the only word in which is contained the glorification
of all good things, of all the things that are the offspring of
the good principle?'

2.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the praise of Holiness (Asha:
the Ashem Vohu), O Spitama Zarathushtra!

3.

'He who recites the praise of Holiness, in the fullness of
faith and with a devoted heart, praises me, Ahura Mazda; he praises
the waters, he praises the earth, he praises the cattle, he praises
the plants, he praises all good things made by Mazda, all the
things that are the offspring of the good principle.

4.

'For the reciting of that word of truth, O Zarathushtra! the
pronouncing of that formula, the Ahuna Vairya, increases strength
and victory in one's soul and piety.

5.

'For that only recital of the praise of Holiness is worth
a hundred khshnaothras of the beings of Holiness, when delivered
while going to sleep, a thousand when delivered after eating,
ten thousand when delivered during cohabitation, or any number
when delivered in departing this life.'

6.

'What is the one recital of the praise of Holiness that is
worth ten others in greatness, goodness, and fairness?'

7.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O holy Zarathushtra!
that a man delivers when eating the gifts of Haurvatat and Ameretat,
at the same time professing good thoughts, good words, and good
deeds, and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.'

8.

'What is the one recital of the praise of Holiness that is
worth a hundred others in greatness, goodness, and fairness?'

9.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O holy Zarathushtra!
that a man delivers while drinking of the Haoma strained for the
sacrifice, at the same time professing good thoughts, good words,
and good deeds, and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil
deeds.'

10.

'What is the one recital of the praise of Holiness that is
worth a thousand others in greatness, goodness, and fairness?'

11.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O holy Zarathushtra!
that a man delivers when starting up from his bed or going to
sleep again, at the same time professing good thoughts, good words,
and good deeds, and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil
deeds.'

12.

'What is the one recital of the praise of Holiness that is
worth ten thousand others in greatness, goodness, and fairness?'

13.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O holy Zarathushtra!
that a man delivers when waking up and rising from sleep, at the
same time professing good thoughts, good words, and good deeds,
and rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.'

14.

'What is the one recital of the praise of Holiness that is
worth this Karshvare of ours, Hvaniratha, with its cattle and
its chariots, without its men, in greatness, goodness, and fairness?'

15.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O holy Zarathushtra!
that a man delivers in the last moments of his life, at the same
time professing good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and
rejecting evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.'

16.

'What is the one recital of the praise of Holiness that is
worth all that is between the earth and the heavens, and this
earth, and that luminous space, and all the good things made by
Mazda at are the offspring of the good principle in greatness,
goodness, and fairness?'

17.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is that one, O holy Zarathushtra!
that a man delivers to renounce evil thoughts, evil words, and
evil deeds.'

1.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'When one of the faithful departs this life, where does his soul
abide on that night?'

Ahura Mazda answered:

2.

'It takes its seat near the head, singing the Ushtavaiti Gatha
and proclaiming happiness: "Happy is he, happy the man, whoever
he be, to whom Ahura Mazda gives the full accomplishment of his
wishes!" On that night his soul tastes as much of pleasure
as the whole of the living world can taste.'

3.

-'On the second night where does his soul abide?'

4.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It takes its seat near the head, singing
the Ushtavaiti Gatha and proclaiming happiness: "Happy is
he, happy the man, whoever he be, to whom Ahura Mazda gives the
full accomplishment of his wishes!" On that night his soul
tastes as much of pleasure as the whole of the living world can
taste.'

5.

-'On the third night where does his soul abide?'

6.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It takes its seat near the head, singing
the Ushtavaiti Gatha and proclaiming happiness: "Happy is
he, happy the man, whoever he be, to whom Ahura Mazda gives the
full accomplishment of his wishes!" On that night his soul
tastes as much of pleasure as the whole of the living world can
taste.'

7.

At the end of the third night, when the dawn appears, it seems
to the soul of the faithful, one as if it were brought amidst
plants and scents; it seems as if a wind were blowing from the
region of the south, from the regions of the south, a sweet-scented
wind, sweeter-scented than any other wind in the world.

8.

And it seems to the soul of the faithful one as if he were
inhaling that wind with the nostrils, and he thinks: 'Whence does
that wind blow, the sweetest-scented wind I ever inhaled with
my nostrils?'

9.

And it seems to him as if his own conscience were advancing
to him in that wind, in the shape of a maiden fair, bright, white-armed,
strong, tall-formed, high-standing, thick-breasted, beautiful
of body, noble, of a glorious seed, of the size of a maid in her
fifteenth year, as fair as the fairest things in the world.

10.

And the soul of the faithful one addressed her, asking: 'What
maid art thou, who art the fairest maid I have ever seen?'

11.

And she, being his own conscience, answers him: 'O thou youth
of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, of good religion,
I am thy own conscience!

'Everybody did love thee for that greatness, goodness, fairness,
sweet-scentedness, victorious strength and freedom from sorrow,
in which thou dost appear to me;

12.

'And so thou, O youth of good thoughts, good words, and good
deeds, of good religion! didst love me for that greatness, goodness,
fairness, sweet-scentedness, victorious strength, and freedom
from sorrow, in which I appear to thee.

13.

'When thou wouldst see a man making derision and deeds of
idolatry, or rejecting (the poor) and shutting his door, then
thou wouldst sit singing the Gathas and worshipping the good waters
and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, and rejoicing the faithful that
would come from near or from afar.

14.

'I was lovely and thou madest me still lovelier; I was fair
and thou madest me still fairer; I was desirable and thou madest
me still more desirable; I was sitting in a forward place and
thou madest me sit in the foremost place, through this good thought,
through this good speech, through this good deed of thine; and
so henceforth men worship me for my having long sacrificed unto
and conversed with Ahura Mazda.

15.

'The first step that the soul of the faithful man made, placed
him in the Good-Thought Paradise;

'The second step that the soul of the faithful man made, placed
him in the Good-Word Paradise;

'The third step that the soul of the faithful man made, placed
him in the Good-Deed Paradise;

'The fourth step that the soul of the faithful man made, placed
him in the Endless Lights.'

16.

Then one of the faithful, who had departed before him, asked
him, saying: 'How didst thou depart this life, thou holy man?
How didst thou come, thou holy man! from the abodes full of cattle
and full of the wishes and enjoyments of love? From the material
world into the world of the spirit? From the decaying world into
the undecaying one? How long did thy felicity last?'

17.

And Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ask him not what thou askest him,
who has just gone the dreary way, full of fear and distress, where
the body and the soul part from one another.

18.

'[Let him eat] of the food brought to him, of the oil of Zaremaya:
this is the food for the youth of good thoughts, of good words,
of good deeds, of good religion, after he has departed this life;
this is the food for the holy woman, rich in good thoughts, good
words, and good deeds, well-principled and obedient to her husband,
after she has departed this life.'

19.

Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: ' O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent
Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One!

'When one of the wicked perishes, where does his soul abide on
that night?'

20.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It rushes and sits near the skull,
singing the Kima Gatha (Y46), O holy Zarathushtra!

'"To what land shall I turn, O Ahura Mazda? To whom shall
I go with praying?"

'On that night his soul tastes as much of suffering as the whole
of the living world can taste.'

21.

-'On the second night, where does his soul abide?'

22.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It rushes and sits near the skull,
singing the Kima Gatha, O holy Zarathushtra! "To what land
shall I turn, O Ahura Mazda? To whom shall I go with praying?"

'On that night his soul tastes as much of suffering as the whole
of the living world can taste.'

23.

-'On the third night, where does his soul abide?'

24.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It rushes and sits near the skull,
singing the Kima Gatha, O holy Zarathushtra! "To what land
shall I turn, O Ahura Mazda? To whom shall I go with praying?"

'On that night his soul tastes as much of suffering as the whole
of the living world can taste.'

25.

At the end of the third night, O holy Zarathushtra! when the
dawn appears, it seems to the soul of the faithful one as if it
were brought amidst snow and stench, and as if a wind were blowing
from the region of the north, from the regions of the north, a
foul-scented wind, the foulest-scented of al] the winds in the
world.

26-32.

And it seems to the soul of the wicked man as if he were inhaling
that wind with the nostrils, and he thinks: 'Whence does that
wind blow, the foulest-scented wind that I ever inhaled with my
nostrils?'

33.

The first step that the soul of the wicked man made laid him
in the Evil-Thought Hell;

The second step that the soul of the wicked man made laid him
in the Evil-Word Hell;

The third step that the soul of the wicked man made laid him in
the Evil-Deed Hell;

The fourth step that the soul of the wicked man made laid him
in the Endless Darkness.

34.

Then one of the wicked who departed before him addressed him,
saying: 'How didst thou perish, O wicked man? How didst thou come,
O fiend! from the abodes full of cattle and full of the wishes
and enjoyments of love? From the material world into the world
of the Spirit? From the decaying world into the undecaying one?
How long did thy suffering last?'

35.

Angra Mainyu, the lying one, said 'Ask him not what thou askest
him, who has just gone the dreary way, full of fear and distress,
where the body and the soul part from one another.

36.

'Let him eat of the food brought unto him, of poison and poisonous
stench: this is the food, after he has perished, for the youth
of evil thoughts, evil words, evil deeds, evil religion after
he has perished; this is the food for the fiendish woman, rich
in evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds, evil religion, ill-principled,
and disobedient to her husband.

37.

'We worship the Fravashi of the holy man, whose name is Asmo-hvanvant;
then I will worship the Fravashis of the other holy Ones who were
strong of faith.

38.

'We worship the memory of Ahura Mazda, to keep the Holy Word.

'We worship the understanding of Ahura Mazda, to study the Holy
Word.

'We worship the tongue of Ahura Mazda, to speak forth the Holy
Word.

'We worship the mountain that gives understanding, that preserves
understanding; [we worship it] by day and by night, with offerings
of libations well-accepted.

39.

'O Maker! how do the souls of the dead, the Fravashis of the
holy Ones, manifest themselves?'

40.

Ahura Mazda answered: 'They manifest themselves from goodness
of spirit and excellence of mind.'

41.

Then towards the dawning
of the dawn, that bird Parodarsh, that bird Kareto-dasu hears
the voice of the Fire.

42.

Here the fiendish Bushyasta, the long-handed, rushes from
the region of the north, from the regions of the north, speaking
thus, lying thus: 'Sleep on, O men! Sleep on, O sinners! Sleep
on and live in sin.'

hsbe

Glossary


================================================================================
Vishtasp Yasht
Source: https://www.avesta.org/fragment/vytsbe.htm
================================================================================

Vishtasp Yasht

Sacred Books of the
East
, American Edition, 1898.)

1.

'I am a pious man, who speaks words of blessing,' thus said
Zarathushtra to the young king Vishtaspa. - 'She appears to me
full of Glory, O Zarathushtra!' - 'O young king Vishtaspa! [I
bless thee] with the living of a good life, of an exalted life,
of a long life. May thy men live long! May thy women live long!
May sons be born unto thee of thy own body!

2.

'Mayest thou thyself be holy, like Zarathushtra.

'Mayest thou be rich in cattle, like an Athwyanide!

'Mayest thou be rich in horses, like Pourushaspa!

'Mayest thou have a good share of bliss, like king Husravah!

'Mayest thou have strength to reach the Rangha, whose way lies
afar, as Vafra Navaza did.

3.

'May ten sons be born of thy own body! three as Athravans,
three as warriors, three as tillers of the ground! May one of
them be like Jamaspa, that he may bless thee with great and ever
greater happiness!

4.

'Mayest thou be freed from sickness and death, like Pesho-tanu.

'Mayest thou have piercing rays, like Mithra!

'Mayest thou be warm, like the moon!

'Mayest thou be resplendent, like fire!

'Mayest thou be long-lived, as long-lived as an old man can be!

5.

'And when thou hast fulfilled a duration of a thousand years,
[mayest thou obtain] the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of
the holy Ones!

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

6.

'Give him strength and victory! Give him welfare in cattle
and bread!' thus said Zarathushtra to the young king Vishtaspa!
'Give him a great number of male children, praisers [of God] and
chiefs in assemblies, who smite and are not smitten, who smite
at one stroke their enemies, who smite at one stroke their foes,
ever in joy and ready to help.

7.

'Ye gods of full Glory, ye gods of full healing, let your
greatness become manifest!'

8.

Zarathushtra addressed him, saying: 'O young king Vishtaspa!
May their greatness become manifest as it is called for!

'Ye Waters, impart and give your Glory to the man who offers you
a sacrifice!

'This is the boon we beg (for thee) of Ashi Vanguhi, of Rata,
with eyes of love.'

9.

Parendi, of the light chariot, follows: 'Mayest thou become
manifest unto him, the young king Vishtaspa!

'May plenty dwell in this house, standing upon high columns and
rich in food! Thou wilt never offer and give bad food to a priest:
for a priest must be to thee like the brightest offspring of thy
own blood.'

10.

Zarathushtra spake unto him: 'O young king Vishtaspa!

'He who supports the Law of the worshippers of Mazda, as a brother
or as a friend, he who treats her friendly in any way, looks to
keep off want of food from her.'

11.

The holy Zarathushtra preached that law to Frashaostra and
Jamaspa: 'May ye practise holiness and thrive, O young Frashaostra
(and Jamaspa)!'

12.

Thus said Ahura Mazda unto the holy Zarathushtra, and thus
again did Zarathushtra say unto the young king Vishtaspa: 'Have
no bad priests or unfriendly priests; for bad priests or unfriendly
priests will bring about much harm, and, though thou wish to sacrifice,
it will be to the Amesha-Spentas as if no sacrifice had been offered.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

13.

'When I teach thee, that thou mayest do the same to thy son,
O Vishtaspa! receive thou well that teaching; that will make thee
rich in children and rich in milk; rich in seed, in fat, in milk'.

14.

'Thus do we announce unto thee, Ahura Mazda, and Sraosha,
and Ashi, and the Law of the worshippers of Mazda, with the whole
of all her hymns, with the whole of all her deeds, with the whole
of her performances; the Law of Mazda, who obtains her wishes,
who makes the world grow, who listens to the songs and rejoices
the faithful man at his wish; who protects the faithful man, who
maintains the faithful man;

15.

From whom come the knowledge of holiness and the increase
in holiness of the world of the holy Principle, and without whom
no faithful man can know holiness.

'To thee come every Havanan, every Atarevakhsha, every Frabaretar,
every Aberet, every Asnatar, every Rathwishkar, every Sraosha-varez
(priestly offices);

16.

'Every priest, every warrior, every husbandman; every master
of a house, every lord of a borough, every lord of a town, every
lord of a province;

17.

'Every youth of good thoughts, good words, good deeds, and
good religion; every youth who speaks the right words; every one
who performs the next-of-kin marriage; every itinerant priest;
every mistress of a house; every wandering priest, obedient to
the Law.

18.

'To thee come all the performers (of holiness), all the masters
of holiness, who, to the number of three and thirty, stand next
to Havani, being masters of holiness.

19.

'May they be fully protected in thee, O young king Vishtaspa!
While thou smitest thy adversaries, thy foes, those who hate thee,
a hundred times a hundred for a hundred, a thousand-times a thousand
for a thousand, ten thousand times ten thousand for ten thousand,
myriads of myriads for a myriad.

20.

'Proclaim thou that word, as we did proclaim it unto thee!

'O Maker of the good world! Ahura Mazda, I worship thee with a
sacrifice, I worship and forward thee with a sacrifice, I worship
this creation of Ahura Mazda.'

21.

The young king Vishtaspa asked Zarathushtra: 'With what manner
of sacrifice shall I worship, with what manner of sacrifice shall
I worship and forward this creation of Ahura Mazda?'

22.

Zarathushtra answered: 'We will make it known unto thee, O
young king Vishtaspa!

'Go towards that tree that is beautiful, high-growing, and mighty
amongst the high-growing trees, and say thou these words: "Hail
to thee! O good, holy tree, made by Mazda! Ashem Vohu!"

23.

'Let the faithful man cut off twigs of baresma, either one,
or two, or three: let him bind them and tie them up according
to the rites, being bound and unbound according to the rites.

'The smallest twig of Haoma, pounded according to the rules, the
smallest twig prepared for sacrifice, gives royalty to the man
(who does it).'

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

24.

Zarathushtra said: 'O young king Vishtaspa! Invoke Ahura Mazda,
who is full of Glory, Ahura Mazda, and the sovereign Heaven, the
boundless Time, and Vayu who works highly.

25.

'Invoke the powerful Wind, made by Mazda, and Fate.

'Repeat thou those words, that the god invoked may give thee the
boon wished for; that thou, strong, and belonging to the creation
of the good Spirit, mayest smite and take away the Druj and watch
with full success those who hate thee; smite down thy foes, and
destroy at one stroke thy adversaries, thy enemies, and those
who hate thee.

26.

'Proclaim thou those prayers: they will cleanse thy body from
deeds of lust, O young king Vishtaspa!

'I will worship thee, O Fire, son of Ahura Mazda, who art a valiant
warrior. He falls upon the fiend Kunda, who is drunken without
drinking, upon the men of the Druj, the slothful ones, the wicked
Daeva-worshippers, who live in sin.

27.

'He trembles at the way made by Time and open both to the
wicked and to the righteous.

'They tremble at the perfume of his soul, as a sheep does on which
a wolf is falling.

28.

'Reciting the whole collection of the Staota Yesnya prayers
brings one up all the way to the blessed Garo-nmana, the palace
beautifully made. That indeed is the way.

29.

'That man does not follow the way of the Law, O Zarathushtra!
who commits the Baodho-(varshta) crime with a damsel and an old
woman,' said Zarathushtra to the young king Vishtaspa.

'Let him praise the Law, O Spitama Zarathushtra! and long for
it and embrace the whole of the Law, as an excellent horse turns
back from the wrong way and goes along the right one, smiting
the many Drujes.

30.

'Go forward with praises, go forward the way of the good Mazdean
law and of all those who walk in her ways, men and women.

He who wishes to seize the heavenly reward, will seize it by giving
gifts to him who holds up (the Law) to us in this world here below
....

31.

'Let him give (the Law) to him who is unfriendly to her, that
he may become friendly.

'Wash thy hands with water, not with gomez, and let thy son, who
will be born of thy wife, do the same.

'Thus thy thought will be powerful to smite him, who is not so;
thy speech will be powerful to smite him, who is not so; thy deed
will be powerful to smite him.

32.

'"Hear me! Forgive me!" - We, the Amesha-Spentas,
will come and show thee, O Zarathushtra! the way to that world
to long glory in the spiritual world, to long happiness of the
soul in Paradise;

33.

'To bliss and Paradise, to the Garo-nmana of Ahura Mazda,
beautifully made and fully adorned, when his soul goes out of
his body through the will of fate, when I, Ahura Mazda, when I,
Ahura Mazda, gently show him his way as he asks for it

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

34.

'They will impart to thee full brightness and Glory.

'They will give him quick and swift horses, and good sons.

'He wishes to go to the Law, the young king Vishtaspa,'

Zarathushtra said, 'Let him who is unfriendly to her become a
follower of the Law of Mazda, such as we proclaim it.

35.

'Proclaim thou ever (unto the poor).' Ever mayest thou wait
here for the refuse that is brought unto thee, brought by those
who have profusion of wealth!" Thus the Druj will not fall
upon thee and throw thee away; thou wilt wield kingly power there.

36.

'The Law of Mazda will not deliver thee unto pain. Thou art
entreated (for charity) by the whole of the living world, and
she is ever standing at thy door in the person of thy brethren
in the faith beggars are ever standing at the door of the stranger,
amongst those who beg for bread.

'Ever will that bread be burning coal upon thy head.

'The good, holy Rata, made by Mazda, goes and nurses thy bright
offspring.'

37.

Zarathushtra addressed Vishtaspa, saying: 'O young king Vishtaspa!
The Law of Mazda, O my son! will give thy offspring the victorious
strength that destroys the fiends.

'Let no thought of Angra Mainyu ever infect thee, so that thou
shouldst indulge in evil lusts, make derision and idolatry, and
shut (to the poor) the door of thy house.

38.

'Atar thus blesses the man who brings incense to him, being
pleased with him and not angry, and fed as he required: "May
herds of oxen grow for thee, and increase of sons! May fate and
its decrees bring thee the boons thou wishest for! Therefore do
thou invoke and praise (me) excellently in this glorious world!
That I may have unceasing food, full of the glory of Mazda and
with which I am well pleased."

39.

'O Mazda! take for thyself the words of our praise: of these
words I speak and speak again, the strength and victorious vigour,
the power of health and healing, the fulness, increase, and growth.

'Bring it together with the words of hymns up to the Garo-nmana
of Ahura Mazda. He will first enter there. Therefore do thou pronounce
these prayers.

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

40.

'Converse ye with the Amesha-Spentas,' said Zarathushtra unto
the young king Vishtaspa, 'and with the devout Sraosha, and Nairyo-sangha,
the tall-formed, and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, and the well-desired
kingly Glory.

41.

'Men with lustful deeds address the body; but thou, all the
night long, address the heavenly Wisdom; but thou, all night long,
call for the Wisdom that will keep thee awake.

'Three times a day raise thyself up and go to take care of the
beneficent cattle.

42.

'Of these men may the lordship belong to the wisest of all
beings, O Zarathushtra! May their lord belong to the wisest, O
Zarathushtra! Let him show them the way of holiness, let him show
them at once the way thereto, which the Law of the worshippers
of Mazda enters victoriously. Thus the soul of man, in the joy
of perfect holiness, walks over the bridge, known afar, the powerful
Chinvat-bridge, the well-kept, and kept by virtue.

43.

'How the worlds were arranged was said to thee first, O Zarathushtra!
Zarathushtra said it again to the young king Vishtaspa; therefore
do thou praise him who keeps and maintains the moon and the sun.

He who has little friendship for the Law, I have placed him down
below to suffer.'

44.

Thus said Angra Mainyu, he who has no Glory in him, who is
full of death: 'This is an unbeliever, let us throw him down below;
this is a liar, or a traitor to his relatives, and like a mad
dog who wounds cattle and men; but the dog who inflicts wounds
pays for it as for wilful murder.

The first time he shall smite a faithful man, the first time he
shall wound a faithful man, he shall pay for it as for wilful
murder.

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

45.

'Mayest thou receive, O holy young king Vishtaspa! (a house)
with a hundred ...., ten thousand large windows, ten thousand
small windows, all the year long, O holy Vishtaspa! never growing
old, never dying, never decaying, never rotting, giving plenty
of meat, plenty of food, plenty of clothes to the other worshippers
of Mazda.

46.

'May all boons be bestowed upon thee, as I proclaim it unto
thee! May the Amesha-Spentas impart to thee their brightness and
glory and plenty! May they give him quick and swift horses and
good sons, strong, great in all things, powerful to sing the hymns.

47.

'He wields his power according to the wish of Ahura Mazda,
the Good Spirit, and for the destruction of the Evil Spirit, whichever
of two men goes quicker to perform a sacrifice (to Ahura); but
if he chooses to perform the sacrifice and prayer to us not in
the right way, he does not wield the right power, he will not
reign.

48.

'He will receive bad treatment in the next world, though he
has been the sovereign of a country, with good horses to ride
and good chariots to drive. Give royalty to that man, O Zarathushtra!
who gives royalty unto thee with good will.

49.

'Thou shalt keep away the evil by this holy spell: "Of
thee [O child!] I will cleanse the birth and growth; of thee [O
woman!] I will make the body and the strength pure; I make thee
a woman rich in children and rich in milk; a woman rich in seed,
in milk, and in offspring. For thee I shall make springs run and
flow towards the pastures that will give food to the child."

50.

'Do not deliver me into the hands of the fiend; if the fiend
take hold of me, then fever with loss of all joy will dry up the
milk of the good Spenta-Armaiti. The fiend is powerful to distress,
and to dry up the milk of the woman who indulges in lust and of
all females.

51.

'The perfume of fire, pleasant to the Maker, Ahura Mazda,
takes them away from afar; ...; and all those that harm the creation
of the Good Spirit are destroyed;

52.

'Whom Mithra, and Rashnu Razishta, and the Law of the worshippers
of Mazda wish to be taken far away, longing for a man who is eager
to perform and does perform the ceremonies he has been taught;
...

'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good .... (8)

53.

'The words of the Vahishtoishti Gatha are to be sung: "Happy
is he, O holy Vishtaspa, happy the man, whoever he be, to whom
Ahura Mazda gives the full accomplishment of his wishes."

'Where does his soul abide on that night?'

54.

Ahura Mazda answered: ' O my son, Frashaostra! It takes its
seat near the head, singing the Ushtavaiti Gatha and proclaiming
happiness: "Happy is he, happy the man whoever he be!"

'On the first night, his soul sits in Good Words; on the second
night, it sits in Good Deeds; on the third night, it goes along
the ways (to Garo-nmana).

55.

'At the end of the third night, O my son, Frashaostra! when
the dawn appears, it seems to the soul of the faithful one as
if it were brought amidst plants [and scents: it seems as if a
wind were blowing from the region of the south, from the regions
of the south], a sweet-scented wind, sweeter-scented than any
other wind in the world, and it seems to his soul as if he were
inhaling that wind with the nose, and it asks, saying: "Whence
does that wind blow, the sweetest-scented wind I ever inhaled
with my nose?"

56.

'And it seems to him as if his own conscience were advancing
to him in that wind, in the shape of a maiden fair, bright, white-armed,
strong, tall-formed, high-standing, thick-breasted, beautiful
of body, noble, of a glorious seed, of the size of a maid in her
fifteenth year, as fair as the fairest things in the world.

57.

'And the soul of the faithful one addressed her, asking: "What
maid art thou, who art the fairest maid I have ever seen?"

58.

'And she, being his own conscience, answers him: "O thou
youth, of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, of good religion!
I am thy own conscience.

"Everybody did love thee for that greatness, goodness, fairness,
sweet-scentedness, victorious strength, and freedom from sorrow,
in which thou dost appear to me; [and so thou, O youth of good
thoughts, good words, and good deeds, of good religion! didst
love me for that greatness, goodness, fairness, sweet-scentedness,
victorious strength, and freedom from sorrow, in which I appear
to thee.

59.

'"When thou wouldst see a man] making derision and deeds
of idolatry, or rejecting (the poor) and shutting (his door),
then, thou wouldst sit, singing the Gathas, and worshipping the
good waters, and Atar, the son of Ahura Mazda, and rejoicing the
faithful that would come from near or from afar.

60.

'"I was lovely, and thou madest me still lovelier; I
was fair, and thou madest me still fairer; I was desirable, and
thou madest me still more desirable; I was sitting in a forward
place, and thou madest me sit in the foremost place, through this
good thought, through this good speech, through this good deed
of thine; and so henceforth men worship me for my having long
sacrificed unto and conversed with Ahura Mazda."

61.

'The first step that the soul of the faithful man made, placed
him in the Good-Thought Paradise; the second step that the soul
of the faithful man made, placed him in the Good-Word Paradise;
the third step that the soul of the faithful man made, placed
him in the Good-Deed Paradise; the fourth step that the soul of
the faithful man made, placed him in the Endless Light.

62.

'Then one of the faithful, who had departed before him, asked,
saying: "How didst thou depart this life, thou holy man?
How didst thou come, thou holy man! from the abodes full of cattle
and full of the wishes and enjoyments of love? from the material
world into the world of the spirit? from the decaying world into
the undecaying one? How long did thy felicity last?"'

63.

And Ahura Mazda answered: 'Ask him not what thou askest him,
who has just gone the dreary way, full of fear and distress, when
the body and the soul part from one another.

64.

'[Let him eat] of the food brought to him, of the oil of Zaremaya:
this is the food for the youth of good thoughts, of good words,
of good deeds, of good religion, after he has departed this life;
this is the food for the holy woman, rich in good thoughts, good
words, and good deeds, well-principled, and obedient to her husband,
after she has departed this life.'

65.

Spitama Zarathushtra said to the young king Vishtaspa: "To
what land shall I turn, O Ahura Mazda? To whom shall I go with
praying?'

Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good ....

Go to [

|

|
Vishtasp Yasht

|
]


================================================================================
Vanainti Yasht
Source: https://www.avesta.org/fragment/vneng.htm
================================================================================

Avesta Fragments: Vaetha Nask

Based on translation of Humbach and Jamaspasa, 1969, who observe,
"the situation to be supposed for the major part of the chapters
of Vn. seems to be similar to that of the Rivayats: some learned
Dastur has been consulted by his congregation on religious problems,
and in consequence of this he gives his replies quoting religious
texts in support of his views. For this purpose he makes, more
or less, free use of quotations from the original Avesta. Amongst
these, apparently, are those which come from lost portions of
the old Avestic canon...."

Notes: Avesta passages are followed by Pahlavi translation/comments
which are in parentheses. Vn1-8 = FrB, Vn23-39
= FrD

(In the name of the Creator Ohrmazd)

I. QUESTIONS ON RELIGIOUS CONDUCT AND DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD

1. The knowledge of the Mazdayasnian Religion. Ahura Mazda revealed:

(The knowledge of the Mazdayasnian Religion has been revealed
by Ohrmazd i.e. the knowledge has been revealed in the good Mazdayasnian
Religion.)

2. In this way a man is righteous.

(In this way a man is righteous, i.e. a man is a good man.)

3. First he recites the Frastuye [[creed]].

(First the man recites the Frastuye, i.e. he utters the Frastuye
according to the Mazdayasnian religion.)

4. Secondly he [is] a performer of good deeds.

(Thereafter he properly causes to perform superior deeds, [i.e.]
he properly performs meritorious deeds.)

5. [When] a man or a woman or a child passes away,

(When a man or a woman or a child passes away, i.e. dies, in the
house of a Mazdayasnian,)

6. one shall lead a dog near his feet,

(near the feet of the dead a dog of any species should be made
to sit, i.e. a shepherd's dog, a street dog, a bloodhound, a sporting
dog, a yellow dog having four eyes, a puppy, an eagle, a fox,
a mountain kite, or a weasel,)

7. thereby one smites the Nasu.

(owing to that, [i.e.] therefrom, one smites the Nasu.)

8. Then two men shall place [the dead body] on his own bedding
and pillow.

(Then two men shall place the dead body on his own bedding and
pillow.)

9. Then they shall carry the dead body to the Dakhma.

(Then they who are the Mazdayasnians shall carry the dead body
to the Dakhma, i.e. they shall take it to the place of the cupola
[which is the sky.])

10. Then they shall perform the ceremony of purification [in honor]
of holy Srosha for three days and three nights.

(For the soul of the dead they shall then perform the ceremony
of purification [in honor] of holy Srosh, i.e. one makes clean,
i.e. the Khshnuman of holy Srosh, i.e. the worship of holy Srosh
should be performed for three days and three nights.)

11. By that [I shall proceed with] his soul [thus]: I shall cause
to cross his soul thrice over the Chinwad Bridge towards the Best
Existence, I who am Ahura Mazda.

(By that I shall cause to cross his soul over the Ciyan-Vitarg,
I shall cause to pass his soul towards the Best Existence, I who
am Ohrmazd, [i.e.] I shall make his soul more comfortable.)

12. Thus I shall carry [him] to the Best Existence, to the Best
Righteousness, to the Best Lights.

(And him, I shall carry, to the Best Existence, to the Best righteousness,
to the Best Lights, i.e. I shall protect [his] soul and life,
i.e. he takes the hand of holy Srosh.)

13. One ties the extremities and one ties the midriff; clothes
should not be used.

14 - 15. Let not sorcerous heretics thereby tie .....

16. On receipt [of remuneration].

(He receives [after death, i.e.] on this earthly [plain] he does
not receive.)

II. PARALLELS TO SOME QUOTATIONS FOUND IN FRAHANG-I OIM 3f
AND 3i

17. Ahura Mazda said unto Spitama Zarathushtra.

(And Ohrmazd said unto Spitaman Zartosht.)

18-21. A man who discerns the words, [i.e.] he perceives the secret
revelations, is better than a prudent reciter. - Good renown for
the body and long bliss for the soul.

(Speech of men. To teach the poor. One who perceives is better
for this perishable body and for the soul than one who is a prudent
reciter of the words. They are a help for a long time.)

22. It scorches liver and bile of the evil-minded.

(Who burns up keeping off the action of opposition.)

III. QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO ILLEGITIMATE INTERCOURSE AND
ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN

23. Then Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda.

24. If there should be a man of Mazdayasnian Religion,

(If there is a man [in] the Mazdayasnian religion, i.e. the man
is a good man in the Mazdayasnian [Religion],)

25. [and if] he discharges semen into a woman of alien faith [ainyo-tkaesha]

([and if] that man discharges semen into a woman of alien faith,
i.e. he cohabits with a woman of alien faith, [then] a sin is
perpetrated, i.e. the man will have become Druvand,)

26. [and] therefrom a son is born,

(thus therefrom a son is expected to be born, i.e. it becomes
manifest,)

27. if that man will have wealth, shall he give it to the son
or shall he not give?

(if that man does not give)

28. Thereupon replied Ahura Mazda (Ohrmazd)

29. If there is a man of Mazdayasnian Religion.

(If there is a man [in] the Mazdayasnian Religion, i.e. the man
is a good man,)

30. [and if] he discharges semen into a woman of alien faith,

([and if] that man discharges semen into a woman of alien faith,
i.e. he cohabits,)

31. [and] therefrom a son is expected to be born, one shall not
strike his life.

(when therefrom a son is expected to be born to the woman, i.e.
a child becomes manifest, one shall not strike that life, i.e.
on the contrary it shall be protected.)

32. If [the son] dies through him by intention,

(If he kills that child, i.e. he kills,)

33. then [this evil deed] makes the man guilty as a Peshotanu.

(thus that man becomes guilty as a Tanapuhr, i.e. he becomes worthy
of death [because] a second sin has been committed [by him, namely
a sin against] life.)

34. Thus that man becomes of alien faith.

(Thus that man becomes of alien faith, i.e. he shall become Druvand.)

35. I shall not guide that [man] across the Chinwad Bridge, I
who am Ahura Mazda.

(I shall not cause that man to cross over my Chinwad Vitarg, I
who am Ohrmazd, i.e. I don't cause to pass his soul over the Bridge.)

36. If that man will have wealth,

(if that man has wealth, i.e. he has patrimony and drahm,)

37. [suppose] he should give half of the share to the son, [and]
he should give half of the share to the woman of alien faith,

(suppose he should give half of the share to the son, and he should
give half of the share to the woman of alien faith,)

38. [and] his own people [i.e. family] will not receive [anything],

(and the people who are his own relations will not have received,
i.e. his own people: he does not bequeath the drahm for them,)

39. then the man becomes Druvant.

(thereby that man then would become one among the Druvands, then
that man is not in the religion, he is among the Druvands and
sinners.)

IIIa. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON ATONEMENT AND REPENTANCE

40-41. Nobody who is of the Mazdayasnian Religion, man or woman,
[shall] cohabit with a person in the religion or of alien faith.

(Any one whosoever is in the Mazdayasnian Religion, man or woman---.
Nobody in the religion or of alien faith [shall] cohabit, i.e.
[if] a man unites with every other person. i.e. he cohabits, [then]
a sin is committed, the merits do not remain, [i.e.] the meritorious
deeds performed [by him, his] destiny becomes worse.)

42. [Supposing the guilt is not detected and the Ratu] does not
prescribe [atonement].

(It is not prescribed, i.e. one shall not cohabit with everybody.)

43. then he makes his own body impure up to eternity.

(then he makes his own body impure up to eternity, i.e. unclean.)

44. [In this case the Ratu] is not [able to] prescribe atonement.

(And punishment is not prescribed by him.)

45. Repentance should be [performed] before the Ratu.

(When one says that repentance [should be performed], then it
should be performed near the Ratu, i.e. before the Ratu.)

IV. COLLECTION OF INCOMPLETE AVESTAN QUOTATIONS SCATTERED
IN THE PAHLAVI VIDEVDAT

46. They flow over the earth towards [...] or water.

(They will cause that water to flow on the earth.)

47. There are seven [months of summer], five of winter, created
by him.

(Seven are summer months and five winter, that created.)

48-49. And even those are cold. - For what period of time the
existence of the holy one was produced?

(Such are the sorts, as long as this period of time will last.
The existence of the holy one was produced by him.)

50. And if he should carry alone one who is dead.

(And [if] he should carry singly one who is dead.)

51. Not carried by the fly.

(Not that which is carried by the fly.)

52. Who has accepted should carry that libation unto fire. Just
as a man of feeble old age.

(One who accepts thus carries those libations unto fire. Just
as a man of feeble old age and time.)

53. He himself dies, he who [carries] singly.

54. Who dig in this earth.

(Who will cause to dig up this earth.)

55-56 Who buries into the earth the body of a righteous man who
has died.

(He who is the righteous man causes to dig out the dead body from
the earth.)

57. ???

(The catacombs over any man whosoever.)

58. Not sought after. - Of the Turanian ... countries.

(Not that which is ... The keepers of the tombs are from that
country.)

59. A span's [length], an ell's [length]. And those men.

(Span [and] ell of those men.)

60. For a year's length. All, of all kinds.

(Of a year's length, the entire of all kinds.)

61. [If one] of those men dies, the dog shall see him with its
eyes. Nobody shall carry alone [a dead body].

([If one] of those men dies, first the dog shall see him. And
he who is not seen [by the dog] nobody shall carry [him] singly.)

62. Gnawed ... gnawed. - Of the Turanian ... countries. - Of a
man who goes with his own shoes (= barefooted). - ... - They were.
- Riding on horse, driving a chariot. - On his own bedding and
pillow. - Should he suffer injury from the operation. - He selects
[a Dakhma], he put down on the Dakhma.'

(As it is said before.)

63. Both of them were real righteous men. - By this he clears
away all evil thought and evil word and evil deed. - Just as a
righteous one unto the righteous one.

(Evidently he becomes holy. - Thus it removes all evil thought,
evil word and evil deed, [i.e.] they will remove. - Just as the
holy man he became holy.'

IVa. SUPPLEMENTARY QUOTATIONS TAKEN FROM AV. VIDEVDAT ETC.

64-65. Such will be the man who thinks righteousness, who seeks
righteousness [but] retards righteousness, who comes forth [with]
water meant for libation, polluted by a carcass.

(Such is the man who thinks of righteousness in [his] person,
to whom that [righteousness] appears in [his] person whereby he
drives away, he who comes forth [with] Ap-zohr polluted by a carcass.)

66. Thus by his action [he is] Peshotanu, unclean upto eternity.

(Thus from that action [he is] Tanapuhr, i.e. worthy of death.
Up to eternity he becomes impure, [i.e.] he himself becomes a
sinner, the merits do not remain, [his] destiny becomes worse.)

67. ??? (The progress becomes grievous.)

68. ???

69. ... remuneration, - Through them he shall not kill the man,
through them he shall not kill the dog.'

(He shall not kill those men, he shall not kill those dogs.)

70. Daevic Druj, produced [by the Daevas], do thou perish.

(Perish thou that which has been created by Devs and Druj.)

V. RITES OF THE FOURTH DAY

71-72. In the house of a Mazdayasnian, on the fourth day, one
offers Myazda which contains milk products and wine. One prepares
[such Myazd].

(When one passes away in the house of a Mazdayasnian, then, on
his fourth day, in that house one shall offer Myazd, one shall
prepare flesh and wine, i.e. it should be properly prepared.)

73. As many kinds of fruits exist [together with] Myazda and [Gaush]
Hudah. - He shall do what is to be done, He shall perform farmers
duty.

(So much Myazd, [Gaush] Hudah, various kinds of fruits, i.e.,
grains, is consecrated and one consecrates also farm products.

74-75. One carries the Baresman with libations, one offers the
Yasna, one offers [unto Ahura Mazda,] the glorious among the Amesha
Spentas, one offers unto good Ashi, [one offers] with good thought,
with good word, and with good deeds.

(One carries the Barsom with libations, i.e. one offers the Yasna.
- One offers [unto] the glorious Amahraspands and one offers [unto]
good Ashishwang and [one offers] one's good thought, one's good
word and one's good deeds.)

76. [One offers] unto the Mazdayasnian Religion and unto Mithra
with wide pastures and unto holy Sraosha and unto Verethraghna
created by Ahura [and] unto powerful Parendi and unto the entire
Mazdayasnian Religion.

([One offers unto] Mihr with wide pastures [and unto] the Mazdayasnian
Religion, unto Srosh who is the holy one, victorious, created
by Ohrmazd, [and] unto powerful Parand and the entire Mazdayasnian
Religion.)

VI. PROBLEMS OF CONVERSION

77. Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda,

(Zartosht asked of Ohrmazd, i.e. of him who is holy,)

78. if there should be a man of alien faith, i.e. a Druvant,

(if there should be a man of alien faith, i.e. a Druvand,)

79. and if that man aspires to the good Mazdayasnian Religion,

([and if] unto that man the good Religion appears agreeable,)

80. shall [the Zarathushtrians], the opponents of the Daevas,
the followers of the Law of Ahura, admit him or shall they not
admit him?

(shall [the Zoroastrians], the opponents of the Devs, i.e. the
followers of the Law of Ohrmazd, admit him or shall they not admit
him, i.e. does he enter into the religion, i.e. he who does not
belong to it?)

81. Then Ahura Mazda (Ohrmazd) said,

82. if there should be a man of alien faith, [i.e.] a Druvant,

(if there should be a man of alien faith, i.e. [if] there should
be a Druvand,)

83. that man to whom the good Mazdayasnian Religion appears agreeable,

([and if] that man agrees to the good Mazdayasnian Religion,)

84. [Then the Zarathushtrians], the opponents of the Daevas, the
followers of the law of Ahura, shall admit him to those who have
taken the vow.

([The Zoroastrians] who are separated from the Devs and belong
to the religion of Ohrmazd, the faithful ones, shall admit [him],
i.e. one shall fulfill the desire for the Good Religion.)

85. [Thus] such men shall accept good thought, good word, and
good deeds.

([Thus] such men shall accept the superior good thought, good
word, and good deeds.)

86. [Such man] invokes [by] the chanting of the Gahs.

(He invokes by chanting of the Gahs, i.e., he invokes [with] the
holy word,)

87. He does not practice evil speech.

(That man does not act in compliance with evil speech.)

88. [If] it should be the case that [one] of such men before has
committed any evil deeds,

([If] it should be the case [that] one of such men before has
committed any evil deeds, i.e., every sin [which] has been committed
before,)

89. [then] the good Mazdayasnian Religion casts off any evil deed.

([then] regarding that sin the good Mazdayasnian Religion casts
off all evil deeds, i.e., it regards sin lightly.)

90. Thus the man becomes of the Good Religion in the sane degree

(Thus that man becomes of the Good Religion in the same degree)

91. as that man [who] before had been of [Good] Religion,

(as he [who] before had been of the Good Religion, i.e. [who]
from the beginning had made current the religion.)

92. In the same manner as those men [who before had been of good
Religion] he becomes holy, O Spitama Zarathushtra.

(In the same manner as those men [who before had been of Good
Religion] he will have become holy, O Spitaman Zartosht, i.e.,
he will have entered the Good Religion.)

93. Thus such men [like he] enter the good M[azdayasnian] Religion.

(Thus he who [belongs to those] men will have entered the Good
Religion.)

94. Thus he recites the Gahs.

(Thus that man [shall] recite the words of the Gahs, i.e. he shall
utter.)

95. Thus one accepts all Yazatas.

(Thus one shall accept all Yazads, i.e. one shall celebrate.)

96. Then, [when] one eats cooked food, [it is prescribed] that
one shall shut one's mouth.

(Thereafter one [shall] eat cooked food and one [shall] eat cooked
meat, i.e. one shall eat.)

97. After having eaten the food, one shall consecrate the Gathas
, so that one releases one's mouth.

(Thus that man after he [has] eaten, i.e. the meal has finished,
consecrates the Gathas, so that he releases his mouth, i.e. he
shall open.)

98. Thus that man becomes of Good Religion.

(Thus that man will have become Behdin, i.e. Mazdayasnian.)

VIa. THE FIVE WATCHS OF THE DAY

99. At the five watches of the day one invokes [by] the chanting
of the Gahs.

(Everyday at the five watches one [should] recite the Gahs, i.e.
[one should] utter the recitation of the Gahs.

100. The divisions of the day, The Lords of Holiness. - At the
tine of Hawani one worships Mithra of wide pastures.

(The divisions of the day, the Lords of Holiness. At the time
of Hawan one [shall] worship Mihr of wide pastures, i.e. one shall
recite the Gah of Mihr,)

101. one pays homage to the Sun and to Mithra.

(At the proper time one shall pay homage to Khwarshed and Mihr,
i.e. one shall perform one's duty of homage.)

102. At the time of Rapithwin one worships Asha Vahishta,

(At the time of Rapithwin [one shall worship] Best Holiness, i.e.
one [shall] recite the Gah of Ardwahisht,)

103. one pays homage to the Sun and to Mithra,

(and then one [shall] pay homage to Khwarshed and Mihr, i.e. one
shall perform one's duty of homage.)

104. At the time of Uzayeirina one worships Berezant [i.e. Apam
Napat],

(At the time of Uzerin one [shall] worship the Yazad Burz, i.e.
one shall recite the Gah of Uzerin,)

105. one pays homage to the Sun and to Mithra.

(thereafter one shall pay homage to Khwarshed and to Mihr, i.e.
one shall perform one's duty of homage.)

106. At the time of Aiwisruthrima Aibigaya one worships the Fravashis
of the holy.

(At the time of Aiwisruthem Aibigayik one [shall] worship the
Farohars of the holy, i.e. one shall recite the Aiwisruthrem Gah,)

107. and one worships the good holy Sraosha.

(and one [shall] worship the good holy Srosh.)

108. At the time of Ushahina one recites Sraoshahe Ashyehe together
with any other [prayer].

(At the time of Ushahin one [shall] recite Srosh Ahlav together
with any other [prayer], i.e. one [shall] recount.)

109. Nobody shall recite [in honor of the Daevas, [since thus]
one calls them up for help onto the Daeva worshippers.)

(Nobody shall mention the Devs. Everybody who is a Dev worshipper
invokes [them].

110. I who am Ahura Mazda cause to cross such men to the [im]perishable
world.

'( throw such man to the destructible world, I who am Ohrmazd,
i.e. he goes to the gate of hell, he goes on account of his sinfulness.)

VIb. ON SECRETION

111. [When] those men [intend to] pass urine,

([When] those men intend to pass urine, i.e. make urine,

112. [then they recite:] The evil spirit, the Druvant shall be
smitten.

([then they recite:] Do ye smite the destructive spirit, the Druvand.
[Thus] one smites the Devs.)

113. One shall recite one Ahuna Vairyas, then one shall shut one's
mouth.

(That man shall recite one Ahunwar, i.e. one shall recite, [then]
one shall bind one's tongue, i.e. one shall bind.)

114. After having made urine

(After having made urine, i.e. it will have been done)

115. one recites the Humatascha of the Gathas.

(thereafter one shall recite the Humat of the Gathas.)

116. One shall recite three Ashem Vohu, two Humatanam, three Hukhtanam,
three Hukhshathrotemai and four Ahuna Vairya.

(One [shall] recite three Ashemvohuk, two Humatanam, three Hukhshathrotemai
and four Ahunwars, i.e. one shall recite.)
